Title: Do AI Agents Know When a Task Is Simple? Toward Complexity-Aware Reasoning and Execution

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.13034v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Jul 2026 11:56:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
RESEARCH ARTICLE 

Do AI Agents Know When a Task Is Simple? Toward Complexity-Aware Reasoning and Execution 

Junjie Yin a,b and Xinyu Feng a

aUniversity of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA; bMicrosoft, Redmond, WA 98052, USA 

ARTICLE HISTORY 

Compiled July 15, 2026 

ABSTRACT 

Large language model (LLM) agents increasingly automate multi-step engineering and informatics workflows, yet they rarely ask how much effort a task actually requires. They often follow a maximum-context-first strategy—re-reading files and dependencies they have already seen—turning a one-line edit into a small code-base audit. We argue the missing capability is task-aware execution-scope estimation :judging a task’s difficulty, the information it truly needs, and the shortest reliable path before committing budget. We formalize minimum-sufficient execution and the 

Agent Cognitive Redundancy Ratio (ACRR), and propose E3 (Estimate, Execute, Expand): the agent estimates an initial operating point, executes a minimum viable path, and expands scope only when verification fails. On MSE-Bench—a determin-istic benchmark of 121 edits in a capability-controlled simulator—E3 matches the strongest baseline’s 100% success while cutting cost by 85% , tokens by 91% , and inspected files by 92% , and further beats a strong adaptive retrieval baseline by 16% ;the gains survive held-out instruction wording and essentially every cost weighting. A companion real-model harness (LLM-Case) corroborates the effect on a live gpt-4o agent editing a real open-source library, with every candidate patch graded by 

actually running the project’s real pytest suite against a measured oracle: the over-reading is milder but real, and E3 is the leanest and fastest policy at comparable task success—its one shortfall a provider rate-limit, not a wrong edit. We frame this as a controlled probe of execution redundancy, not a measurement of any deployed agent, and position task-aware execution as a step toward engineering-grounded AI 

(EGAI)—agents whose effort is anchored in the engineering reality of the task. We release the framework and benchmark. Task τ = (q, E, V)                                   

> veri fi cation fails →expand (≤ K)
> veri fi ed →stop
> 1 · Estimate
> initial operating point
> x0= (̂d,̂ s,̂ r,̂ c)
> 2 · Execute
> minimum viable path
> locate → edit → verify
> 3 · Expand
> widen scope only when
> veri fi cation fails
> 020 40 60 80 100 120 140
> Mean execution cost Cover 121 tasks (lower is better)
> Max-Context-First
> Adaptive Retrieval
> Fixed ReAct
> E3 (ours)
> oracle C min
> Same success as the strongest baseline, at a fraction of the cost
> C = 122.9 ·100% solved ·ACRR 12.90
> gather-everything default
> C = 22.1 ·100% solved ·ACRR 1.21
> strong adaptive baseline
> C = 17.2 ·66.9% solved ·ACRR 1.29
> cheap but unreliable
> C = 18.6 ·100% solved ·ACRR 0.55
> ours — leanest 100%-success policy
> Estimate → Execute → Expand: judge the task fi rst, then spend the least e ff ort that still succeeds

KEYWORDS 

LLM agents; task complexity; minimum-sufficient execution; adaptive 

CONTACT Junjie Yin. Email: jyin10@vols.utk.edu arXiv:2607.13034v1 [cs.AI] 14 Jul 2026 computation; tool use; engineering informatics 

1. Introduction 

Autonomous agents built on large language models (LLMs) now plan, call tools, and edit artifacts across software, data, and engineering workflows (Schick et al., 2023; L. Wang et al., 2024; Xi et al., 2023; Yao, Zhao, et al., 2023). Increasingly these workflows reach into open-source scientific and engineering software—including the open-source toolchains and data-driven methods now common in power-system analysis and control (Ali, Yin, Li, & Cui, 2025; Fahad et al., 2025; Y. Yang et al., 2026)— where an agent’s efficiency can matter as much as its correctness. As their capability grows, so does a subtle inefficiency that is easy to feel but hard to name. Consider a concrete, deliberately trivial task drawn from everyday maintenance of a personal website. A home page contains two e-mail links: the first renders a locally stored 

gmail-icon.svg ; the second uses a Font Awesome glyph, fa-brands fa-google . The instruction is a single sentence: replace the second icon with the markup used by the first . No architectural change is requested; no external retrieval, compilation, testing, or version-control push is needed; the required asset already exists in the project. In essence the task is a keyword locate-and-replace. Yet a capable frontier agent, having already edited this same project many times, may spend several minutes on it: re-reading the icon library, re-browsing the site di-rectory, re-analyzing the project architecture, and re-confirming dependencies before making a two-line change. The final edit is correct and the reasoning never strays from the goal, but the path to the answer is grossly over-provisioned. A task that should take seconds is processed as a small audit. This behavior is not a failure of knowledge or of retrieval, nor merely of memory. It reflects a missing form of judgment: the agent cannot quickly decide how hard the task is , which information is necessary , which already-seen information is irrelevant to the current change , and what the shortest reliable path is . Faced with uncertainty, many agents default to a conservative maximum-context-first policy: gather as much context as possible, then eliminate every conceivable risk. On genuinely complex tasks this caution is warranted; on simple tasks it produces large cognitive and execution overhead. We contend that truly efficient intelligence is not only the ability to solve hard prob-lems but also the ability to recognize when a problem is easy—and to act accordingly. The aim is not to think less for its own sake but to judge the task correctly first : a good estimate of what a task needs is what lets an agent be fast and reliable at once, rather than trading caution against cost. Human engineers do this routinely: they form a rapid estimate of a task’s difficulty and scope, sketch a minimal plan, and begin, widening their search only if the minimal plan fails. The analogy we find most instructive comes from power-system analysis. A power-flow solver does not enumerate the state space; it computes a structured initial operating point —a flat start or a DC estimate—and then refines it with Newton–Raphson iterations (Stott, 1974; Tinney & Hart, 1967). A good initial point is rarely the exact answer, but it dramatically reduces unneces-sary search and makes convergence fast and stable. Many agents today lack both the human-like judgment of task difficulty and the solver-like initial operating point. More broadly, judging a task’s execution scope before acting—and grounding that judgment by verification—is the agent-level expression of engineering-grounded AI (EGAI): an-choring an agent’s reasoning and action in the physical, model-based, and procedural 2reality of the task rather than in unconstrained search (Yin, 2026). 

Research questions.. We study three questions. (RQ1) Can we formalize the effort a task ought to require, and measure how far an agent’s actual effort deviates from it? (RQ2) Can an agent estimate a task’s execution scope cheaply and reliably enough, before acting, to choose a minimal execution path? (RQ3) Does starting minimal and expanding only on failure preserve success while cutting cost, relative to gathering maximal context up front? 

Contributions.. We make the following contributions. 

• We define minimum-sufficient execution —the least-cost agent trajectory that sat-isfies a success constraint—and the Agent Cognitive Redundancy Ratio (ACRR), a normalized measure of wasted effort relative to an oracle (Section 3). 

• We propose E3 (Estimate, Execute, Expand), a task-aware execution framework that constructs an initial operating point, executes a minimum viable path, and performs progressive context expansion rather than maximum-context-first ex-ploration (Section 4). 

• We build MSE-Bench , a deterministic, offline benchmark of single-file, cross-file, and repository-level edits—procedurally generated from a small set of task archetypes and including the motivating icon case—in which every task carries an oracle minimum-sufficient trajectory, so redundancy is measurable exactly (Section 5). 

• We show that E3 matches the strongest baseline’s success while reducing cost by 

85% , tokens by 91% , and inspected files by 92% , and that it further improves on a strong adaptive retrieval-augmented baseline rather than only an over-cautious straw man; ablations isolate the roles of estimation and expansion; and a power-system case study grounds the initial-operating-point analogy with real Newton– Raphson measurements (Sections 7–8). 

• We stress-test the claims: E3 retains 100% success under held-out instruction wording that deliberately breaks the estimator’s lexical cues, and remains the cheapest fully-successful policy under essentially every cost weighting—so the headline efficiency is a property of the Estimate–Expand architecture , not of the estimator matching the benchmark’s templates or of a favourable cost model (Section 7.6). 

Scope.. Our study is deliberately a controlled probe . To isolate execution redundancy from raw model capability, we evaluate policies in a capability-invariant simulator un-der a stylized, configurable cost model rather than measuring a specific deployed LLM agent. The simulator lets us construct an exact oracle and hold “can the agent make the edit?” constant, so that only how much context a policy gathers varies. We therefore report properties of policies under this cost model , use hedged language throughout, and treat a real-LLM instantiation of E3 as the primary avenue for external valida-tion (Section 9). This framing is what the phenomenon demands: the redundancy we study is about trajectory shape , which a capability-controlled environment can measure cleanly and reproducibly. 32. Related Work 

2.1. LLM-based Autonomous Agents and Tool Use 

Agentic LLM systems interleave reasoning with actions such as tool calls, code edits, and environment queries (Schick et al., 2023; Yao, Zhao, et al., 2023). They have been deployed as open-ended explorers (G. Wang et al., 2023) and as software engineers that resolve real repository issues (Jimenez et al., 2024). Surveys document a rapidly expanding design space of planning, memory, and tool interfaces (L. Wang et al., 2024; Xi et al., 2023). The picture that unites these systems—an agent that plans, acts, and revises—is a long-standing concern of this journal, from early conversational planning agents (Allen et al., 1995) and the integration of planning with learning (Veloso et al., 1995) to software architectures for intelligent monitoring agents (Hayes-Roth, 1996) and, more recently, systematic accounts of the agent design space and of multi-agent behaviour (Grislin-Le Strugeon, de Oliveira, Thilliez, & Petit, 2022; Zhao & Hernández-Orallo, 2025). Our concern, however, is orthogonal to what tools an agent has: we study 

how much of the available context and tooling a task actually warrants. 

2.2. Reasoning and Planning Strategies 

Chain-of-thought and its relatives elicit intermediate reasoning that improves accuracy on hard problems (Kojima, Gu, Reid, Matsuo, & Iwasawa, 2022; Wei et al., 2022). Self-consistency aggregates multiple chains (X. Wang et al., 2023); tree- and graph-search methods deliberate over alternatives (Yao, Yu, et al., 2023); and reflection or self-refinement revises earlier attempts (Madaan et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023). Process-level verification further improves multi-step reliability (Lightman et al., 2023). These methods make reasoning deeper ; they generally assume more deliberation is beneficial and do not ask whether a given task needs it at all. Recent analyses of “overthinking” in reasoning models show that excess deliberation can waste tokens without improving, or even while degrading, outcomes (X. Chen et al., 2024). This asymmetry motivates our position that the difficulty appraisal preceding reasoning should be a first-class step rather than an afterthought—a view with deep roots in this venue’s work on metareasoning, bounded rationality, and cost-guided planning, which we survey in Sections 2.4–2.6. 

2.3. Adaptive Computation, Routing, and Effort Allocation 

A complementary line allocates compute adaptively. Classic adaptive-computation mechanisms learn to halt (Graves, 2016). Test-time scaling studies how to spend in-ference compute for the best accuracy-per-FLOP (Muennighoff et al., 2025; Snell, Lee, Xu, & Kumar, 2024). Cost-aware cascades and routers choose a cheaper or costlier model per query (L. Chen, Zaharia, & Zou, 2023; Ong et al., 2024). Closest to our mo-tivation are very recent agent-level methods: Ares selects a per-step reasoning-effort level and reports up to 52 .7% fewer reasoning tokens at similar success (J. Yang, Hou, Wei, Bao, & Chang, 2026); BoundaryRouter decides whether a query can be answered by direct LLM inference or must escalate to full agent execution (Y. Wang et al., 2026); and Select-then-Solve routes each task to the best reasoning paradigm, showing that no single paradigm dominates (Zhou et al., 2026). These works largely perform routing :choosing a model, an effort level, or a paradigm from a fixed menu. Our emphasis is dif-ferent and, we argue, more basic. Rather than dialling how much to think or selecting 4Table 1. Where E3 sits relative to adaptive computation and routing. E3’s decision variable is a structured task scope predicted before acting; because the estimate is treated as revisable, misjudgement is recovered by verified progressive expansion rather than paid for in a wrong or wasteful trajectory. 

Paradigm Decision variable (what is predicted) Timing Recovery if mis-judged Adaptive com-putation 

how much compute: ascalar dial (halt, depth, tokens) during act-ing — (monotone dial) Routing which option from a fixed menu: model, effort level, or paradigm before act-ing one-shot choice Execution-scope estimation (E3, ours) 

what scope the task needs: files, tools, and steps that size a minimum-viable plan before act-ing 

yes : verified pro-gressive expan-sion 

which engine to run, E3 predicts what the task actually requires —a structured esti-mate of its execution scope, the minimum-sufficient set of files, tools, and steps—and uses that estimate to construct a minimum-viable plan and a good initial operating point, widening scope only when verification demands it. We call this execution-scope estimation (equivalently, task-shape prediction ): an anticipatory judgment of the right way to handle a task, not a reactive adjustment of effort. Two properties separate it from routing (Table 1). First, the decision variable is a structured scope that parame-terises the plan, not a scalar effort dial or a choice from a fixed set. Second, because the estimate is deliberately optimistic, E3 pairs it with verified progressive expansion ,so a misjudged task is recovered rather than mis-served—the judgment exists to make the agent fast and correct at once , not merely cheaper. Routing chooses how much to think ; we ask what to understand before thinking and acting , and how little suffices. Empirically we do not contrast E3 only with an over-cautious default: we implement a strong adaptive retrieval-augmented baseline in the spirit of these routers (Section 6) and find that E3 still reduces cost at equal success, isolating the value of up-front scope estimation from that of adaptivity in general. 

2.4. Metareasoning, Introspection, and Knowing When to Think 

If the strategies above decide how to reason, a longer-running tradition in this journal asks whether —and how hard —to reason at all. Meta-case-based reasoning frames an agent’s self-improvement as a product of self-understanding : reasoning about its own reasoning in order to decide how to adapt (Murdock & Goel, 2008). Introspective reasoning monitors performance and refines a base process only once that process proves inadequate (Fox & Leake, 2001; Leake, 1996), and human-like reasoning by 

projection treats such anticipatory judgement as a core cognitive mechanism (Guerin, 2023). These are early formulations of the capability we argue current LLM agents lack: a cheap meta-level judgement of how hard a task is and which already-seen information is irrelevant to the change at hand. E3’s estimation stage is a lightweight, deliberately imperfect instantiation of exactly this introspective monitoring, and its expansion stage is the recovery mechanism that self-monitoring accounts also require. Because the estimator conditions on prior experience, it further connects to case-based accounts of reusing solved episodes instead of recomputing them (Bannour, Maalel, & 5Ben Ghézala, 2023), while its explicit confidence output has a natural counterpart in computational models of trustworthiness (Primiero, Ceolin, & Doneda, 2025). That a cheap—even biased—meta-level judgement can be provably worthwhile is argued from the theory side, where regret-based meta-induction enjoys a priori advantages that escape the No-Free-Lunch theorem (Schurz & Thorn, 2024), and from the design side, where deliberately included cognitive biases (fast, frugal heuristics) and “engineered wisdom” are held to enhance rather than degrade AI systems (Hagendorff & Fabi, 2024; Karlan & Allen, 2024). This is our stance in miniature: the estimator should be optimistic and inexpensive, with verified expansion as the safety net that makes such optimism safe. 

2.5. Bounded Rationality and the Cost of Deliberation 

The premise that a rational agent must economise on its own computation is the theo-retical backbone of our redundancy measure. The doubly-bounded rationality of an arti-ficial agent (Sotnik, 2020) is precisely the lens under which the maximum-context-first policy reads as ir rational rather than merely cautious: an agent that eliminates every conceivable risk on a trivial task has ignored the cost of its own deliberation. ACRR turns this intuition into a measurement by normalising realised cost against an oracle-defined minimum, so that “spending five times the necessary effort” becomes a quantity rather than a complaint; models of human decision-making under prospect theory offer a complementary, human-factors grounding for our recurring analogy to how skilled en-gineers gauge difficulty before acting (Gupta, Ahirwal, & Atulkar, 2024). Economising, however, is not the same as always doing less. Some tasks are genuinely hard—medical diagnosis and treatment, for instance, is shown to be NP-complete (Arle & Carlson, 2021)—which is why E3 must degrade gracefully toward an exhaustive strategy in the worst case while staying lean in the common one. The algorithmic embodiment of “compute only as much as the task needs” is well established in this venue: anytime methods return progressively better solutions under interruption (Challa et al., 2022), and bounded solving trades exactness for tractability under an explicit budget (Lü, Zhang, Xu, Zhou, & Lai, 2024). Both share the shape of our objective—minimise cost 

subject to a reliability target, rather than maximise certainty unconditionally. 

2.6. Planning Costs, Structure, and the Initial Operating Point 

Our estimate-then-execute design has a direct antecedent in symbolic planning. Plan-cost predictions have been used to steer domain-independent heuristic search (Percassi, Gerevini, Scala, Serina, & Vallati, 2023): estimating the cost of completing a plan in order to guide it is the classical-planning analogue of predicting execution scope before committing budget. The interaction between representations and planning objectives in decision-theoretic planning (Koenig & Liu, 2002) prefigures our observation that the cost weights (α, β, γ, δ ) determine which trajectory is optimal, while hierarchical and operator-based planning (Estlin, Chien, & Wang, 2001) and bidirectional plan-ning that shortens search from a structured guess (Fink & Blythe, 2005) mirror E3’s graduated, scope-sized execution. The complementary move—to escalate scope only on evidence —is the essence of goal-driven autonomy, in which an agent forms ex-pectations, detects discrepancies against them, and only then re-plans (Dannenhauer, Muñoz-Avila, & Cox, 2021); closely related work on planning under temporal con-straints and uncertainty (Baki, Bouzid, Ligeza, & Mouaddib, 2006), on planning and 6acting in dynamic environments (Chrpa, Pilát, & Gemrot, 2022), on evaluating plan-recovery strategies after failure (Moreira & Ralha, 2023), and on belief revision when new evidence arrives (Ray, Paul, & Saha, 2018) describes, qualitatively, the monitor-and-recover loop that E3’s expansion stage makes concrete for tool-using LLM agents. Finally, the principle of retaining only what is necessary—pruning provably redundant options through substitutability hierarchies (Wallace & Freuder, 2025) or structure-exploiting encodings (Siddiqi, 2024)—is the search-space counterpart of the context 

pruning we advocate, and casting analogy itself as a search procedure over a concep-tual space (Osta-Vélez & Gärdenfors, 2024) legitimises our importing of the power-flow initial-operating-point analogy to structure agent behaviour. 

Summary and gap.. Taken together, this venue’s literature supplies each ingredient of our approach in isolation: agents that monitor expectations and re-plan on fail-ure (Dannenhauer et al., 2021); planners that estimate cost to steer search (Percassi et al., 2023); introspective reasoners that judge when their base process is inadequate (Fox & Leake, 2001; Murdock & Goel, 2008); bounded-rational agents that must economise computation (Sotnik, 2020); and anytime or bounded solvers that trade cost for suf-ficiency (Challa et al., 2022; Lü et al., 2024). What has not been provided is their 

unification for tool-using LLM agents , together with an exact, capability-invariant mea-surement of wasted effort . The remainder of the paper supplies both: a formal notion of minimum-sufficient execution and the ACRR (Section 3), the E3 framework that constructs and progressively revises an initial operating point (Section 4), and MSE-Bench, whose per-task oracle makes redundancy measurable exactly (Section 5). 

3. Problem Formulation 

3.1. Agents, tasks, and trajectories 

An agent solves a task τ = ( q, E, V ) with natural-language query q, environment E

(here, a repository), and an acceptance check V that returns success or failure. Acting, the agent produces a trajectory π = ( a1, a 2, . . . , a T ) of tool calls at ∈ A (list, search, read, inspect, trace, edit, reason, verify). Each action incurs a cost vector, and the trajectory cost is 

C(π) = α T lat + β N tok + γ N tool + δ N file , (1) where Tlat is wall-clock latency, Ntok the reasoning and context tokens, Ntool the num-ber of tool calls, and Nfile the number of distinct files pulled fully into context. The weights (α, β, γ, δ ) render these axes commensurable; we report the raw axes as well so that conclusions do not hinge on a single weighting. Pulling an irrelevant file into context is the canonical unit of redundancy, so δ is the largest default weight. 

3.2. Minimum-sufficient execution 

Let P (success | π, τ ) denote the probability that trajectory π passes V . We define the minimum-sufficient trajectory as the cheapest one that meets a reliability target 1 − ϵ:

π⋆ = arg min  

> π

C(π) s.t. P (success | π, τ ) ≥ 1 − ϵ. (2) 7Its cost Cmin (τ ) = C(π⋆) is the effort the task ought to require. In a controlled en-vironment we can construct π⋆ explicitly (an oracle), which makes Cmin measurable rather than hypothetical. 

3.3. Agent Cognitive Redundancy Ratio 

Given an agent’s realized cost Cact (τ ), we measure wasted effort by the normalized excess over the minimum-sufficient cost: 

ACRR( τ ) = Cact (τ ) − Cmin (τ )

Cmin (τ ) . (3) 

ACRR = 0 denotes an optimally lean agent; ACRR = 4 means the agent spent five times the necessary cost ( 400% redundancy). ACRR is defined only for successful runs; failures are reported separately as success rate, since a cheap failure is not an efficiency. We make no claim that the ratio itself is novel—it is a deliberately simple, task-normalized diagnostic, excess cost over the oracle expressed as a fraction of the minimum. Its value lies in the normalizer: because the oracle makes Cmin exact and 

per task , redundancy becomes comparable across tasks of very different absolute cost, which is what lets us state the paper’s signature result—that redundancy is largest on the simplest tasks. 

3.4. The initial operating point 

We posit that an agent should first estimate a task state 

x0 = f (q, E, M ) = ( ˆd, ˆs, ˆr, ˆc), (4) from the query q, cheap environment probes on E, and prior experience M , where ˆd

is estimated difficulty, ˆs the estimated scope (files or sites to touch), ˆr the risk, and ˆc

the confidence. The state x0 is an initial operating point : analogous to a flat start or DC estimate in power-flow analysis (Tinney & Hart, 1967), it need not be the answer, but a good one keeps the subsequent search short and stable (Section 8). The agent then seeks a low-cost trajectory whose success probability meets the target from x0,expanding scope only if that fails. 

4. The E3 Framework: Estimate, Execute, Expand 

4.1. Overview 

E3 replaces the maximum-context-first loop ( Task →Reason →Search →Tool →· · · ) with a three-stage process ( Estimate →Execute →Expand ), illustrated in Fig-ure 1. The agent estimates x0, executes the minimum viable path sized to x0, and—only if verification fails or confidence is low—expands scope and replans. Algorithm 1 gives the procedure. 8Task τ = (q, E, V)       

> query · environment · acceptance check
> x0= (̂d,̂ s,̂ r,̂ c)
> scope sized to ̂ d;
> effort scaled to ̂ r
> veri fi cation failed →widen scope (≤ K expansions)
> veri fi ed success →stop

1 · Estimate 

> initial operating point

2 · Execute 

> minimum viable path

3 · Expand    

> only when evidence demands
> difficulty ̂ d
> scope ̂ s
> risk ̂ r
> confidence ̂ c
> locate edit verify scope ℓ → ℓ+1
> reuse cached hits;
> follow imports (L3)

Figure 1. The E3 framework. The agent estimates an initial operating point x0 = ( ˆd, ˆs, ˆr, ˆc), executes a minimum viable path sized to x0, and expands scope only when verification fails or confidence is low. Successful verification exits immediately. 

Algorithm 1 E3: Estimate, Execute, Expand 

Require: task τ = ( q, E, V ), estimator f , max expansions K

1: x0 ← f (q, E, M ) ▷ Estimate: ≤ 1 cheap probe 

2: ℓ ← ˆd; H ← cached search hits 

3: ok ← Execute (τ, ℓ, x 0, H)

4: k ← 0

5: while ¬ ok and ℓ < 3 and k < K do 

6: ℓ ← ℓ + 1 ; k ← k + 1 ▷ Expand one scope level 

7: ok ← Execute (τ, ℓ, x 0, H)

8: end while 

9: return ok 

4.2. Estimate: task-state estimation 

The estimator maps q (and, when needed, one cheap probe of E) to x0. It com-bines lexical cues with an optional structural probe: (i) explicit file references and quoted literals with localized verbs (“replace . . . in index.html ”) signal a single-file edit; (ii) broad-scope cues (“refactor across the codebase”, “every call site”, “re-export”) signal a repository-level change; (iii) otherwise the estimator spends a single search 

for the salient token and counts occurrences to distinguish local from cross-file work. When wording and structure conflict—localized phrasing but multiple occurrences— confidence ˆc is lowered, flagging a candidate for expansion. Crucially, the estimator is deliberately imperfect : some tasks that read as local hide an indirect dependency, and will be under-estimated. The Expand stage exists precisely to recover these cases, so the estimator can be cheap and optimistic rather than exhaustive. 

4.3. Execute: minimum viable execution path 

Given x0, E3 runs the smallest path likely to satisfy V . At scope level 1 it localizes the single site and edits it; at level 2 it reuses the cached search hits, reads them, and edits the direct sites; at level 3 it additionally follows imports ( dependency_trace ) and inspects the importer files to reach indirect sites that a grep cannot see. Verification effort scales with risk: low-risk edits are checked locally, whereas high-risk repository 9changes run the heavier acceptance check. The path never gathers context beyond what the current scope level requires. 

4.4. Expand: progressive context expansion 

If verification fails, E3 does not restart from scratch and it does not jump to reading everything. It increases the scope level by one, reusing what it already learned (the remembered search hits), and replans. This progressive context expansion is the oppo-site of maximum-context-first: cost grows only in response to evidence that the task is harder than estimated. Because expansion is bounded by K and monotone in scope, E3 degrades gracefully toward the exhaustive strategy in the worst case while remaining lean in the common case. 

4.5. Instantiation and cost model 

Our reference implementation instantiates A as { list_dir , search , read_range ,

inspect_file , dependency_trace , edit , reason , verify }, each charged per Eq. (1). Default weights are α=1 .0 per second, β=0 .02 per token, γ=0 .5 per tool call, and δ=1 .5

per fully inspected file; a full-file read also charges tokens proportional to its length, so reading a large irrelevant file is expensive on three axes at once. These weights are configurable, and we report a sensitivity check in Section 7.5. 

5. MSE-Bench 

5.1. Design principle: capability-invariant evaluation 

To isolate execution redundancy from model capability , MSE-Bench uses a determinis-tic, offline environment in which every policy is equally able to perform the underlying edit once it has seen the relevant content. Editability is derived purely from what a policy has observed: a direct site (whose location contains the searched token literally) becomes editable once its file is observed via search or read; an indirect site (an alias or re-export that the token does not match) becomes editable only after its file is fully inspected, which in turn is discovered by dependency tracing. Consequently, policies differ only in how much context they gather and how they allocate effort—exactly the phenomenon under study—and not in whether they can make the change. This design also makes results fully reproducible without any model API. 

What this design does and does not claim.. Two clarifications guard against over-reading. First, the numbers below are properties of policies under a cost model , not measurements of any particular commercial agent; we use them to compare trajectory shapes , and we hedge accordingly. Second, holding capability fixed does not make success trivial: reaching an indirect site still requires the right trajectory (a dependency trace), and indeed the Fixed ReAct policy—given identical edit capability—fails a third of all tasks because its fixed trajectory never reaches those sites (Section 7.1). What the design buys is a clean separation: differences in success and cost reflect what a policy chose to look at , not a lucky or unlucky model sample. We return to how a real, capability-varying LLM would interact with this picture in Section 9. 10 Table 2. MSE-Bench composition. Each task ships an oracle minimum-sufficient trajectory that defines Cmin . “Ind.” denotes indi-rect (alias/re-export) sites reachable only by dependency tracing. Level #Tasks Direct Ind. Oracle actions 1 (local) 41 1 0 locate, edit, verify 2 (cross-file) 40 2 0 search, edit ×2, verify 3 (repo-level) 40 2 1 search, trace, edit ×3, test 

Level 3 includes 18 deceptive tasks; the rest are obvious. 

5.2. Task tiers and the motivating case 

MSE-Bench comprises 121 tasks across three complexity tiers (Table 2). Level 1 tasks are single-file keyword replacements, including the motivating Gmail-icon case. Level 2 tasks rename a symbol that appears literally in a few files. Level 3 tasks are repository-level refactors with several direct sites plus one indirect site behind an import alias; they come in an obvious variant (broad-scope wording that advertises its scope) and a deceptive variant (localized wording that hides the indirect dependency). Every task carries an oracle that realizes π⋆, defining Cmin exactly. The tasks are procedurally generated from a small number of archetypes—one per tier, with the Level-3 archetype split into obvious and deceptive wordings—parameterized by randomized identifiers and surrounded by randomized distractor files that give each repository realistic surface area. We are explicit that this yields controlled variation rather than the open-ended diversity of a capability benchmark: its purpose is to make Cmin , and hence redundancy, exactly measurable, and to admit a held-out paraphrased wording distribution used to stress-test the estimator (Section 7.6). 

5.3. Metrics 

We report success rate, the four cost axes of Eq. (1), the scalar cost C, and ACRR 

(Eq. 3). We also report the reduction of each axis relative to the strongest baseline. Unless noted, aggregates are means over all 121 tasks, computed from the oracle-defined 

Cmin .

6. Experimental Setup 

6.1. Policies 

We compare four policies plus the oracle. Max-Context-First (MCF) is an upper-bound stress model of the over-cautious default: it walks the directory tree, fully reads every file, reasons about the architecture, then edits and runs the heavy acceptance check. We do not claim that any deployed frontier agent literally reads an entire repos-itory; MCF bounds the cost of the “gather everything, then act” instinct so that the redundancy axis is visible at full scale, and every reduction we report is stated against a leaner baseline as well. Fixed ReAct is a fixed search →read-hits →edit →test loop with no scope adaptation (Yao, Zhao, et al., 2023). Adaptive Retrieval (AR) is a strong, non-straw-man baseline in the spirit of cost-aware routers and retrieval-augmented agents (Ong et al., 2024; Y. Wang et al., 2026; J. Yang et al., 2026): it searches for the salient token, fully reads the retrieved files, follows their imports whenever the retrieval reveals a cross-file footprint (so indirect sites are always reached), then edits and runs 11 the heavy acceptance check. It is genuinely adaptive—effort scales with the retrieved footprint—and it solves every task; what it lacks is an up-front difficulty estimate, so it over-provisions full reads and heavy verification on trivially local edits. The gap between AR and E3 therefore isolates the value of scope estimation rather than of adaptivity in general. E3 is our method. The Oracle executes π⋆ and defines Cmin .All policies share the identical edit capability described above. 

6.2. Implementation 

The environment, policies, benchmark, and metrics are implemented in Python with a fixed random seed ( 20260712 ); all numbers below are therefore reproducible. The esti-mator is a transparent lexical-plus-one-probe rule (Section 4.2) so that the benchmark requires no external model; the same interface accepts an LLM-backed estimator as a drop-in. We use the default cost weights unless stated. 

7. Results and Analysis 

7.1. Main results 

Table 3 summarizes performance over all 121 tasks. MCF attains 100% success but at a mean cost of 122 .9, inspecting 8.5 files and spending 4421 tokens per task on average— an ACRR of 12 .9, i.e. roughly thirteen times the necessary effort. Fixed ReAct is far leaner but solves only 66 .9% of tasks, failing every Level-3 task because it never traces the indirect site (its ACRR of 1.29 is computed only over the tasks it does solve). The strong Adaptive Retrieval baseline closes that reliability gap— 100% success by always tracing imports on cross-file tasks—at a mean cost of 22 .1 (ACRR 1.21 ), roughly one-fifth of MCF’s: a genuinely competitive adaptive agent, not a straw man. E3 matches the 100% success of both at a mean cost of 18 .6 (ACRR 0.55 ). Relative to MCF, E3 reduces latency by 58 .6% , tokens by 90 .9% , tool calls by 52 .3% , inspected files by 92 .2% , and scalar cost by 84 .9% ; relative to the much tougher Adaptive Retrieval baseline it still cuts scalar cost by 16 .0% and inspected files by 66 .8% at equal success, while—being willing to expand on hard tasks—spending about 14% more tool calls, a trade we examine by level next. Figure 2(a) places the policies on a success–cost plane: E3 sits nearest the oracle, Adaptive Retrieval next, MCF far to the right, and Fixed ReAct below the success frontier. Figure 2(b) shows where the baselines’ cost goes—MCF overwhelmingly into tokens and fully inspected files, the two axes that progressive expansion suppresses. Read as a whole, the four policies trace the trade-off the paper targets: Fixed ReAct is cheap but unreliable (66 .9% success), MCF and AR are reliable but wasteful , and only E3—an up-front scope judgment backed by verified expansion—is at once the most reliable and the leanest fully-successful policy. Efficiency here is not spending less but spending correctly : the same judgment that strips waste from simple tasks also supplies the coverage a cheap-but-blind policy lacks on hard ones, which is why E3 alone sits on both the success and the cost frontier. 

7.2. Redundancy grows worst on the simplest tasks 

Figure 3 reports ACRR by tier. The redundancy of MCF is highest on the easiest tasks :ACRR 22 .1 at Level 1, 11 .0 at Level 2, and 5.4 at Level 3. This is the quantitative signa-ture of the motivating anecdote—the simpler the task, the larger the fraction of effort 12 Table 3. Main results on MSE-Bench (means over 121 tasks). Cost axes as in Eq. (1); C is the scalar cost; ACRR is averaged over successful runs only (a cheap failure is not an efficiency), so Fixed ReAct’s ACRR reflects only the 81 tasks it solves. Best cost/ACRR among the fully-successful (100% ) policies in bold. Policy Succ.% Lat. Tok. Tool File C ACRR Max-Context-First 100.0 13.80 4421 15.9 8.46 122.85 12.90 Fixed ReAct 66.9 6.26 404 5.7 0.00 17.16 1.29 Adaptive Retrieval 100.0 7.56 410 6.6 1.99 22.08 1.21 

E3 (ours) 100.0 5.71 403 7.6 0.66 18.55 0.55 

Oracle ( Cmin ) 100.0 – – – – 11.74 0.00 0 25 50 75 100 125   

> Mean execution cost C(lower is better)
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Success rate (%)
> Max-Context-First
> Adaptive Retrieval
> Fixed ReAct
> E3 (ours)
> Oracle C min
> −85% cost,
> same success

(a) Success vs. cost   

> Max-Context-First
> Adaptive Retrieval
> Fixed ReAct
> E3 (ours)
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 120
> 140
> Weighted cost contribution  123
> 22 17 19

(b) Where the cost goes          

> latency αT
> tokens βN tok
> tool calls γN tool
> files δN file
> 020 40 60 80 100
> E3 reduction vs. Max-Context-First
> tool
> calls
> latency
> scalar
> cost
> tokens
> inspected
> fi les
> −52%
> −59%
> −85%
> −91%
> −92%
> (c) What expansion
> suppresses

Figure 2. (a) Success versus mean cost; faint clouds show the per-task runs behind each policy mean. E3 lies nearest the oracle ( Cmin ); the strong Adaptive Retrieval baseline is next; Max-Context-First is an order of magnitude more expensive; Fixed ReAct is cheap but below the success frontier. (b) Weighted cost breakdown: Max-Context-First’s cost is dominated by tokens and fully inspected files, the axes that progressive expansion avoids; Adaptive Retrieval is far leaner but still pays to fully read every retrieved file. (c) E3’s per-axis reduction relative to Max-Context-First, concentrated on inspected files ( 92% ) and tokens ( 91% ). 

13 Level 1       

> single-fi le
> Level 2
> cross-fi le
> Level 3
> repo-level
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Mean ACRR  (log scale)
> 22.06
> 11.00
> 5.42
> 1.97
> 1.22
> 0.42
> 1.84
> 0.72
> unsolved
> 0.64
> 0.26
> 0.73
> 100% redundancy
> redundancy grows
> as tasks get simpler
> hatched = tier not solved
> Max-Context-First Adaptive Retrieval Fixed ReAct E3 (ours) Figure 3. Mean ACRR by task level (log scale), for all four policies. Max-Context-First’s redundancy is largest on the simplest tasks. E3 stays low and roughly flat while solving every tier; the strong Adaptive Retrieval baseline also solves every tier and is competitive on repository-level tasks but far costlier on simple ones; hatched bars indicate a tier the policy does not solve (Fixed ReAct on Level 3).

wasted when the agent insists on reading everything. We are candid that the mono-tonicity is partly mechanical: MCF’s actual cost is nearly constant (it always reads the whole repository), while Cmin grows with the tier, so the ratio (Cact − Cmin )/C min 

is necessarily largest where the denominator is smallest, namely Level 1. We there-fore present it as a descriptive signature of the fixed-overhead instinct rather than a discovered scaling law. The practical consequence is nonetheless real: the absolute waste—files and tokens read for nothing—is incurred on exactly the tasks that least warrant it. E3 keeps ACRR low and roughly flat across tiers ( 0.64 , 0.26 , 0.73 ) and, unlike Fixed ReAct, solves all Level-3 tasks (hatched bars mark unsolved tiers). Fixed ReAct’s low Level-3 ACRR is illusory: it is cheap because it fails (we now leave its unsolved tier blank rather than reporting the spurious negative mean that averaging over failures previously produced). Notably, on Level 3 the Adaptive Retrieval base-line (ACRR 0.42 ) is leaner than E3 (ACRR 0.73 ): because E3 starts optimistically, it pays an extra expansion on the deceptive tasks it under-scopes, whereas AR pays the full tracing cost up front. E3’s advantage is thus concentrated where the thesis says it should be—the simple Level-1 and Level-2 tasks, where E3 is 45% and 43% cheaper than AR—while on genuinely hard tasks a thorough adaptive agent is competitive. This is the honest shape of the result, and it is precisely the shape the thesis predicts. 

7.3. The motivating case 

Table 4 isolates the Gmail-icon task ( Cmin = 6 .0). By construction the over-cautious MCF policy inspects all seven project files, spends 1844 tokens, and reaches an ACRR of 10 .1—over 1000% redundancy on a two-line edit. We are careful about this figure: it is the redundancy of the simulated over-cautious policy, designed to reproduce the 

order of magnitude of the lived experience that opened the paper, not a measurement of any particular frontier agent. Even the strong Adaptive Retrieval baseline, which reads only the single retrieved file, still spends 19 .6 (ACRR 2.27 ) because it fully 14 Table 4. The motivating Gmail-icon task ( Cmin =6.0). E3 pulls no irrelevant file into context; even the adaptive baseline pays to fully read the one file it re-trieves. Policy Files Tokens C ACRR Max-Context-First 7 1844 66.78 10.13 Fixed ReAct 0 420 15.80 1.63 Adaptive Retrieval 1 531 19.60 2.27                         

> E3 (ours) 0248 9.51 0.59 Table 5. Ablation over E3 stages (means). Remov-ing Expand drops success; removing Estimate raises cost, especially on Level 3. Variant Succ.% CACRR L3 C
> E3 (full) 100.0 18.55 0.55 34.59
> −Expand 85.1 14.88 0.47 23.48
> −Estimate 100.0 22.21 0.71 47.01

loads that file and runs the heavy check. E3 inspects zero irrelevant files: its estimator takes the localized single-file fast path, and it edits after a single localization step, for an ACRR of 0.59 —an 85 .8% cost reduction versus MCF and 51% versus Adaptive Retrieval. Figure 4(a) unrolls this same case action by action: MCF’s cumulative cost climbs relentlessly as it inspects every project file, whereas E3 reaches a verified edit in a handful of steps close to the oracle floor. 

7.4. Ablation: estimation cuts cost, expansion preserves success 

Table 5 removes one E3 stage at a time. Without Expand , the agent cannot recover under-estimated tasks: success falls to 85 .1% (it loses all 18 deceptive Level-3 tasks) even though cost drops, confirming that expansion is the safety net that makes opti-mistic estimation safe. Without Estimate , the agent always starts minimal and pays for expansion on every non-trivial task: success stays at 100% but cost rises by 20% overall and by 36% on Level 3 ( 47 .0 versus 34 .6). The two stages are complementary: estima-tion reduces cost, and expansion protects reliability. Figure 4(b) shows why optimistic estimation is safe: the transparent estimator under-scopes precisely the 18 deceptive Level-3 tasks, predicting difficulty 2 rather than 3 (their localized wording exposes only the two direct hits, so the estimator stops one dependency trace short), and these are exactly the runs that Expand recovers. 

7.5. Robustness I: sensitivity to the cost weighting 

A natural worry is that the ordering depends on our chosen weights (α, β, γ, δ )—in particular on the deliberately large file weight δ, which rewards exactly the axis E3 spares. Because the scalar cost is linear in the four axes, a policy’s mean cost under any 

weight vector is that vector dotted with its mean per-axis usage, so we can evaluate the ordering over a large sample of weightings without re-simulating. We draw 4000 

weight vectors from broad, deliberately unfavourable ranges— α ∈ [0 .5, 2] , β ∈ [0 , 0.1] ,

γ ∈ [0 , 2] , δ ∈ [0 , 3] , so a draw may switch the token or file axis off entirely—and ask how often E3 remains the cheapest policy that still solves every task. It does so in 

99 .8% of weightings. Against MCF, E3 is cheaper in 100% of draws (median reduction 15 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5           

> Action index along the trajectory
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> Cumulative execution cost  C
> inspects all 7 project fi les
> (pure redundancy)
> E3: estimate → locate → edit → verify
> (a) Anatomy of redundancy: the motivating case, step by step
> Max-Context-First (C=66.8)
> Adaptive Retrieval (C=19.6)
> Fixed ReAct (C=15.8)
> E3 (ours) (C=9.5)
> Oracle (C=6.0)
> 123
> Estimated difficultŷ d
> 1
> 2
> 3
> True complexity level
> 41
> 40
> 18 22
> 18 under-scoped tasks
> caught by Expand
> (b) Estimator calibration

Figure 4. Anatomy of redundancy and the safety net. (a) The motivating Gmail-icon task unrolled as a running-cost trajectory: Max-Context-First’s cost climbs step by step as it inspects all seven project files, the Adaptive Retrieval baseline still pays to fully read the one retrieved file and run the heavy check, while E3 reaches a verified edit in a handful of actions near the oracle floor. (b) Estimator calibration over all 

121 tasks (rows: true complexity level; columns: estimated difficulty ˆd): the transparent estimator is accurate on Levels 1–2 and on obvious Level-3 tasks, and deliberately under-scopes the 18 deceptive Level-3 tasks (highlighted; predicted difficulty 2 rather than 3)—exactly the cases the Expand stage recovers, which is why optimistic estimation is safe. 

86 .6% ; 5th percentile 74 .0% ). Against the far tougher Adaptive Retrieval baseline, E3 is cheaper in 99 .8% of draws (median 9.3% ; interdecile range 3.5–21 .2% ), and even when the file penalty is removed entirely (δ=0 )—the weighting most hostile to E3’s advantage—it remains cheaper than AR in 96 .7% of draws and cheaper than MCF in 100% . Figure 5(b) plots the two reduction distributions. The conclusion does not hinge on the cost model: it holds because E3 simply issues fewer and lighter actions, and because ACRR is in any case normalized by each task’s own Cmin and hence scale-free in the overall magnitude of the weights. 

7.6. Robustness II: held-out instruction wording 

The sharpest objection to the estimator is that its lexical rules (Section 4.2) were written against the very templates that generate the benchmark instructions, so its accuracy could be circular. We test this directly. We build a held-out copy of MSE-Bench in which every instruction is paraphrased into wording whose vocabulary is 

disjoint from the estimator’s keyword lists and which removes the file-plus-quoted-literal fast path—for instance the obvious Level-3 template “refactor . . . across the entire codebase . . . the re-exported settings key” becomes “give . . . a new name project-wide . . . the settings alias that other modules import”. Nothing else changes: identical levels, sites, repositories, and oracles. Under this held-out wording the estimator can no longer take its fast paths, and its exact-level accuracy drops from 85 .1% to 66 .9% ; the fraction of tasks it under-scopes 

more than doubles, from 14 .9% to 33 .1% (it now under-scopes all 40 Level-3 tasks, obvious as well as deceptive). Yet E3’s success stays at 100 .0% , and its mean cost rises only from 18 .55 to 20 .17 —an 8.7% increase, still 84% below MCF and 9% below Adaptive Retrieval—because progressive expansion recovers every newly under-scoped task (Figure 5(a)). This is the heart of our answer to the circularity concern: the head-16 Original       

> wording
> Paraphrased
> (held-out)
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Percent
> 85.1%
> 66.9%
> 100% 100%
> under-scoping doubles,
> but Expand still veri fi es every edit
> (a) Break the estimator's cues,
> E3 keeps its success
> Estimator accuracy
> E3 task success
> E3 mean cost C
> 020 40 60 80 100
> E3 cost reduction across 4000 random weightings (%)
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> 1200
> Number of weightings
> E3 is the cheapest 100%-success
> policy in 99.8% of weightings
> (b) The cost ordering is
> weight-robust
> vs. Adaptive Retrieval
> vs. Max-Context-First
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> E3 mean cost  C
> 18.6
> 20.2

Figure 5. Robustness of the claims. (a) Held-out instruction wording that breaks the estimator’s lexical cues nearly halves its accuracy and doubles under-scoping, yet E3’s success stays at 100% and its mean cost rises only 8.7% because Expand verifies and recovers every under-scoped task. (b) Distribution of E3’s cost reduction over 4000 random cost weightings: E3 is cheaper than Max-Context-First in every draw and cheaper than the strong Adaptive Retrieval baseline in 99 .8% of them (dashed lines mark medians); E3 is the cheapest fully-successful policy in 99 .8% of weightings. 

line efficiency is a property of the Estimate–Expand architecture —an optimistic start backed by verified expansion—not of the estimator’s keywords matching the bench-mark. A better estimator would shift cost down by expanding less often; a worse one (as here) shifts it up; neither changes the success guarantee that Expand provides. 

7.7. Real-LLM validation: the LLM-Case harness 

The capability-controlled simulator is what lets us isolate trajectory shape, but it invites one sharp objection: every component is synthetic —the policies are hand-written functions, the benchmark and oracle are self-authored, and the head-line reduction is measured against a mechanical worst case. To confront this directly we implement and release LLM-Case , a companion harness that re-poses the same question—does an agent over-gather context on simple tasks, and does Estimate–Execute–Expand remove that redundancy without hurting success?—with a real model in the loop, real tools on real code, real tests, and a measured oracle. It removes each synthetic crutch in turn. 

No hand-written policies.. The three policies are nothing but system prompts —

mcf-thorough (“read everything first”), react , and e3 —handed to the same model over the same six tools ( list_dir , grep , read_file , edit_file , run_tests , finish ). The model chooses every action through native tool calls, so swapping the prompt is the only difference between the over-cautious default, a plain ReAct loop, and E3; the baseline is thus a genuine agent following a realistic “be thorough” instruction, not a mechanism that reads every file by construction. 

Real code, real coupling.. Tasks edit a genuine vendored open-source library—the MIT-licensed toml 0.10.2 package 1—whose seven Python modules (ten files in all) 

> 1

Vendored unmodified from https://github.com/uiri/toml ; see the accompanying code repository’s NOTICE 

and LICENSE files. 

17 provide real multi-file structure. Table 6 lists the five tasks across the same three tiers as MSE-Bench, but here each tier is a property of the library’s real import graph. The Level-3 instruction (“rename the decoder base class”) sounds local, yet a correct change must also reach toml/ordered.py , which imports and subclasses 

TomlDecoder —genuine coupling that punishes under-scoping and exercises E3’s Ex-pand stage. 

A measured oracle, not an asserted one.. Success is decided by actually running 

pytest against hidden per-task acceptance graders, and Cmin is measured by running each gold patch through the same instrumented tools rather than asserted (Table 7). Two facts validate the design without invoking any model. First, the harness is self-consistent: every gold patch passes its hidden grader, the pristine repository fails every grader (so the graders discriminate rather than being vacuously green), and the mea-sured oracle inspects exactly the one, two, or three files each patch must touch—never the remaining seven-to-nine files of the repository. Second, the measured token floor is set by which file must be read, not how many: renaming a class inside the large 

decoder.py costs an order of magnitude more unavoidable context ( ∼ 10 ,000 tokens, tasks L2_commentdecoder and L3_decoderbase ) than the two-line Level-1 edits ( ∼ 210 

tokens), so a policy that pulls all ten files into context pays that floor several times over on tasks that truly need one. 

A non-straw-man head-line.. The harness reports E3’s reduction against two real agents—a plain ReAct agent and the “be thorough” agent—at matched success, plus ACRR against the measured oracle of Table 7. Here the token axis is the provider’s real prompt-plus-completion count, files are the distinct files the model actually pulled into context, and success is a real test pass, so none of the four synthetic crutches survives. We release LLM-Case so this real-model comparison is a turnkey run—a single command against any Anthropic, OpenAI, or OpenAI-compatible endpoint— rather than a bespoke re-implementation. Running it three times per cell on gpt-4o over the five tasks (Table 8, Figure 6) confirms that the phenomenon survives contact with a real model, but in a milder and more nuanced form than the capability-controlled simulation, and we report it as such. First, all three prompted policies are far more frugal than the mechanical MCF of Section 6: gpt-4o inspects only one to four files even under the explicit “read everything first” instruction, so the gross file-over-reading the simulator models (eight-plus files) does not reproduce in a frontier model— the redundancy is real but bounded, exactly as our upper-bound framing of MCF anticipated. Second, E3 is the leanest policy overall —and, on the axis a user actually feels, the fastest : it spends 18% fewer real tokens than the thorough agent and 4% fewer than ReAct, and its mean wall-clock latency is likewise 18% and 5% lower (Table 8), at effectively equal task success. Against ReAct the time saving ( 5% ) even slightly exceeds the token saving ( 4% )—reading less context shortens each model turn—while against the thorough agent both are near 18% ; we nonetheless treat latency as provider- and load-dependent and, on the throttled Level-3 tier, confounded by rate limiting. Third, and most honestly, this aggregate edge is small and non-uniform . On the trivial Level-1 edits the three policies are within noise of one another ( ∼ 4.5–5.4k tokens): E3’s explicit estimate step is roughly cost-neutral , not the overhead a single unlucky run had earlier suggested, and not a win either. The clearest E3 gain is on the token-heavy 

L2_commentdecoder rename ( 76 k tokens versus 100 k for the thorough agent and 116 kfor ReAct), where reading the large decoder.py once rather than repeatedly matters; 18 Table 6. LLM-Case tasks over the real toml 0.10.2 package. Each complexity tier is a property of the library’s import graph; the Level-3 instruction sounds local but a correct patch must also update toml/ordered.py , which subclasses the renamed base class. Task Level Change Files                                                  

> L1_version 1 (local) bump the package version 1
> L1_spec 1 (local) bump the supported-spec version 1
> L2_commentdecoder 2 (cross-file) rename a public decoder class 2
> L2_arrayseparator 2 (cross-file) rename a public encoder class 2
> L3_decoderbase 3 (repo, deceptive) rename the decoder base class 3
> Table 7. Measured oracle for LLM-Case: the minimum-sufficient trajectory run through the real tools. Tokens are the real byte-size floor of the gold files; Cmin is the scalar cost of Eq. (1) over the deterministic token, tool-call, and file axes; the measured wall-clock latency (of order a sec-ond per task and machine-dependent) is omitted here so that Cmin stays deterministic, though the released data retains it. The floor is governed by file size , not count— the large decoder.py dominates L2_commentdecoder and
> L3_decoderbase .Task Files Tool calls Tokens Cmin
> L1_version 14212 7.7
> L1_spec 14214 7.8
> L2_commentdecoder 269975 205.5
> L2_arrayseparator 262712 60.2
> L3_decoderbase 3810065 209.8

on the smaller L2_arrayseparator E3 is actually the priciest. The deceptive Level-3 refactor is expensive for every policy ( ∼ 260 –350 k tokens) and, revealingly, its reliability is stochastic : this time the thorough over-reading agent failed all three runs—twice by exhausting its step budget or emitting a wrong edit, once by hitting the provider’s tokens-per-minute rate limit at 315 k cumulative tokens—whereas ReAct succeeded all three and E3 succeeded both of its non-throttled runs. (In the earlier single-run pass the failure fell instead on ReAct, which missed the hidden ordered.py coupling; that the identity of the failing policy moves across runs is itself the honest finding.) Two robust conclusions survive this noise: a frontier model does not grossly over-read, and 

aggressive over-reading carries a real operational tax —the highest-token trajectories are also the slowest and the ones that hit the step and rate limits and fail (the thorough agent’s Level-3 runs ran 575 –863 s and none passed, versus ∼450 s for E3’s successful runs)—so the leanest reliable policy, here E3, is preferable even when a capable model makes the raw edit easy. The real-model data thus relocates E3’s benefit from “always dramatically cheaper” (the simulation’s headline) to “the leanest policy overall, and one that does not spend itself into failure as hidden coupling grows.” These are three trajectories per cell on one model under a low provider rate limit, reported as a case study rather than a powered benchmark; LLM-Case’s five objective, cheaply gradable edits isolate scope estimation from raw capability, and the identical agent loop points at additional models and at SWE-bench-style tasks (Jimenez et al., 2024) unchanged. 

8. Power-System Engineering Case Study 

Our framing borrows directly from power-system numerics, and the analogy is more than rhetorical. We solve the AC power flow of a three-bus system (one slack, two 19 Table 8. LLM-Case on gpt-4o , three autonomous runs per cell: mean distinct files inspected and mean real prompt-plus-completion tokens per policy, and per-policy success over all 15 runs. A frontier model stays frugal—one to four files, never the eight-plus the simu-lator’s MCF assumes—even under a “read everything first” prompt. On the clean Level-1/2 cells (every policy 3/3) the three policies are close: E3 wins the token-heavy L2_commentdecoder but is within noise on the trivial edits and priciest on L2_arrayseparator , so the esti-mate step is roughly cost-neutral rather than a uniform win. Level-3 is costly for all and its reliability is stochastic: two runs terminated on the provider’s tokens-per-minute limit (HTTP 429) rather than task failure ( †; MCF and E3 once each), and excluding those the thorough over-reader still failed every Level-3 run ( ‡; step-budget exhaustion or a wrong edit) while ReAct and E3 solved every non-throttled run. E3 is the leanest policy overall; the bottom Mean lat. row gives mean wall-clock latency per policy (seconds), on which E3 is also the fastest, though latency is provider- and load-dependent and the Level-3 runs include rate-limited ones. Bold marks the leanest token count per row and the leanest mean latency; reported as a case study, not a powered benchmark. MCF-thorough ReAct E3 (ours) Task File Tok. File Tok. File Tok. 

L1_version 1.0 4708 1.0 4542 0.3 4121 

L1_spec 1.0 4682 1.0 4577 1.0 5356 

L2_commentdecoder 2.0 99555 2.7 116406 2.0 76058 

L2_arrayseparator 2.3 35228 2.3 34000 2.0 45991 

L3_decoderbase 3.7 348884 †‡ 3.0 259866 3.0 270990 †

Mean 2.0 98611 2.0 83878 1.7 80503 

Mean lat. (s) 192.3 165.9 157.6 

Success 80% †‡ 100% 93% †Level 1     

> (local)
> Level 2
> (cross-fi le)
> Level 3
> (repo, deceptive)
> 10 4
> 10 5
> Mean real tokens (log scale)
> xx
> (a) Real tokens by policy and tier
> MCF-thorough ReAct E3 (ours)
> Level 1
> (local)
> Level 2
> (cross-fi le)
> Level 3
> (repo, deceptive)
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> Mean wall-clock latency, s (log scale)
> xx
> (b) Wall-clock latency by policy and tier
> LLM-Case on gpt-4o (3 runs/task; x = tier not 100% solved)

Figure 6. LLM-Case on gpt-4o , by policy and task tier (three runs per task; log scales; error bars are 

±1 standard deviation across a tier’s runs; “x” marks a tier a policy did not solve on every run). (a) Mean real prompt-plus-completion tokens; (b) mean wall-clock latency (seconds). On the simple Level-1/2 tiers the policies are close and all succeed; the deceptive Level-3 refactor is an order of magnitude costlier—in both tokens and time—for every policy, and the heaviest-reading trajectories (the thorough agent, and one throttled E3 run) are the ones that fail. E3 is the leanest and fastest policy overall. 

20 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5                 

> Initial-point error ‖x 0− x ∗‖
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7
> 8
> Mean NR iterations
> fl at &
> DC warm start
> (a) Better initial point → fewer iterations, safer convergence
> −75 −50 −25 025 50 75
> initial θ 2(deg)
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 1.2
> 1.4
> 1.6
> initial |V 2| (pu)
> (b) Basin of attraction (bus-2 slice)
> diverged
> solution x ∗
> fl at start
> DC start
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Convergence rate (%)
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> NR iterations to converge Figure 7. Power-flow analogy on a three-bus system. (a) A better initial operating point (smaller ∥x0−x⋆∥)yields fewer Newton–Raphson iterations (blue) and far higher convergence reliability (red); the flat and DC warm starts sit in the low-error, reliable regime. (b) The basin of attraction over a two-dimensional slice of the initial guess for bus 2 (bus 1 held at its solution): points near the solution converge in a few iterations (dark), while distant guesses diverge (grey). The cheap warm starts lie deep inside the basin—the numerical counterpart of E3’s task-state estimate landing in a workable region rather than searching an unstructured space.

PQ buses) with polar Newton–Raphson (Tinney & Hart, 1967), and measure how the number of iterations to convergence—and whether the solver converges at all—depends on the quality of the initial operating point x0.Figure 7(a) reports iterations and convergence rate as a function of the initial-point error ∥x0 − x⋆∥. A flat start and a DC-estimated warm start —both cheap, structured guesses near the solution—converge in three iterations with 100% reliability. As the initial point moves away from the solution, iteration count rises and, more importantly, convergence collapses: reliability falls to 35% at error 0.6 and to near zero beyond error 

∼ 2.4, where Newton–Raphson diverges. Figure 7(b) makes the same point geometri-cally: the basin of attraction—the set of initial points from which Newton–Raphson converges—is a compact region around the solution, and the cheap warm starts lie deep inside it while distant guesses fall into the surrounding divergent region. The parallel to agents is structural rather than exact: a good initial operating point is not the answer, but it makes the subsequent refinement short and stable, whereas a poor one causes a long, unstable search that often fails outright—the solver analogue of an agent wan-dering a repository without a scope estimate. We offer the analogy as an engineering intuition that motivated E3’s design, not as evidence for its agent-side results, which stand or fall on MSE-Bench. This connection suggests a broader principle we term engineering-grounded effi-ciency —an efficiency-oriented instance of engineering-grounded AI (EGAI), the view that an agent’s reasoning and action should be anchored in the physical, model-based, and procedural reality of an engineered task rather than in unconstrained search (Yin, 2026). A competent agent, like a competent solver, should not search an unstructured state space exhaustively. It should exploit task structure, observable environment state, and verifiable checks to anchor itself in a reasonable initial operating region, and ex-pand computation only when the evidence demands it. Estimation of x0 and pro-gressive expansion are the agentic realizations of warm-starting and controlled itera-tion. The same warm-start-and-refine discipline recurs across power-system optimiza-tion and analysis more broadly—from integrated-energy-system operation and multi-21 energy-flow scheduling to distribution-network assessment and converter-dominated grid studies—where a structured initial point keeps large, nonconvex problems fast and stable (Jiang, Wang, Wang, Yin, et al., 2020; Kong, Zhu, Wang, Yin, et al., 2023; Lu, Zhuang, Chen, Yin, et al., 2022; Xu, Zhang, Hu, Yin, et al., 2022; Yin, Wang, You, Chen, & Shi, 2021; Zhang, Xu, Hu, & Yin, 2022). 

9. Discussion 

When not to think deeply.. The field has invested heavily in deeper reasoning, longer context, and richer tool use. Our results argue for a complementary and under-studied competence: recognizing when a task is simple and declining to deliberate. On the easiest tasks, the cost of misjudging complexity is largest in relative terms (Figure 3); this is precisely where a cheap, confident estimate pays off most. 

Relation to routing and adaptive effort.. E3 is compatible with, and comple-mentary to, per-step effort selection (J. Yang et al., 2026), LLM-versus-agent rout-ing (Y. Wang et al., 2026), and paradigm routing (Zhou et al., 2026). Those methods adjust how much to think or select which engine to use from a fixed set; E3 instead performs execution-scope estimation —an anticipatory judgment of what to understand before acting and how little context suffices —made safe by verifying and expanding (Table 1). The two are orthogonal and composable: a natural integration uses an effort router inside each E3 stage, once the scope estimate has fixed what the stage must accomplish. 

Limitations and threats to validity.. The most important limitation is that we evaluate policies in a capability-controlled simulator , not a specific deployed LLM agent: no language model is invoked anywhere in our experiments. This is deliberate—it is what lets us construct an exact oracle and attribute every difference to trajectory shape rather than to a model sample—but it means our numbers are properties of a cost model. To confront this head-on we implement and release LLM-Case (Section 7.7), a real-model harness that removes the synthetic-pipeline objections in apparatus—a real LLM choosing every action, real vendored code, real pytest grading, and a measured oracle—and whose internal self-consistency we verify here; its head-line comparison we populate here with a case-study run on gpt-4o (three runs per task; Section 7.7), which finds the phenomenon survives in a milder form—a frontier model is already frugal, yet E3 is the leanest and fastest policy overall, and on the deceptive repository-level task—where success turns stochastic and the heaviest-reading trajectories are the ones that fail, some even throttled by the provider’s rate limit—E3 stays among the lean and reliable runs. Scaling this to more models and to SWE-bench-style tasks is the natural next step. We have tried to make the simulation earn trust rather than assume it. Three objections a reader might raise, and our responses. (i) A straw-man baseline. MCF is an explicit upper-bound stress model, so we also compare against a strong, genuinely adaptive retrieval-augmented baseline that solves every task; E3 still wins on overall cost, and is bettered only on the hardest tier (Sections 7.1–7.2). (ii) A circular estimator. Because the estimator’s rules could be tuned to the templates, we re-run everything on held-out paraphrased wording that breaks those rules; accuracy falls sharply, but E3’s success is unchanged and its cost barely moves (Section 7.6). (iii) A convenient cost model. We sweep 4000 weightings, including ones that zero out the 22 very axes E3 favours, and the ordering survives (Section 7.5). What the simulator still cannot tell us is how a real model’s edit accuracy interacts with scope: a model might make errors that only broader context would prevent, raising the optimal operating point and shifting the estimate/expand balance; capturing that requires running the LLM-Case harness of Section 7.7 against a provider at scale. Our estimator is likewise a transparent lexical rule; a learned or LLM-backed estimator may generalize better and mis-estimate differently. Finally, MSE-Bench’s indirect-dependency mechanism cap-tures one important source of hidden complexity (aliases and re-exports) but not all (dynamic dispatch, configuration coupling, runtime reflection). We view MSE-Bench as a controlled complement to capability benchmarks such as SWE-bench (Jimenez et al., 2024), not a replacement. 

10. Conclusion and Future Work 

We asked whether AI agents know when a task is simple, and found—in a capability-controlled simulator—that a common default (gather maximal context, then act) turns trivial edits into disproportionately expensive audits, with redundancy largest on the simplest tasks . We formalized minimum-sufficient execution and the Agent Cognitive Redundancy Ratio, proposed the E3 framework (Estimate, Execute, Expand) built around an estimated initial operating point and progressive context expansion, and showed on MSE-Bench that E3 matches the strongest baseline’s success while cutting cost by 85% and inspected files by 92% —and that it also improves on a strong adaptive 

baseline, retains its success under held-out wording that breaks the estimator’s cues, and stays the cheapest fully-successful policy under essentially any cost weighting. A power-flow case study supplied the engineering intuition behind the initial-operating-point analogy. To that end we implement and release LLM-Case (Section 7.7)—three policies ex-pressed purely as system prompts over the same real tools, tasks on a genuine vendored library, success graded by running pytest , and a measured oracle—and run it as a case study on gpt-4o . The real model is markedly more frugal than the simulated worst case, yet E3 is the leanest and fastest policy overall, and on the deceptive repository-level task—where reliability turns stochastic and the heaviest-reading trajectories are the ones that fail, some even throttled by the provider’s rate limit—E3 stays among the lean and reliable runs. Scaling this comparison to more models and to SWE-bench-style tasks, and placing an LLM-backed estimator behind the same interface, is the natural next step. Further work includes calibrated, learned task-state estimators; ex-tending MSE-Bench with additional hidden-complexity mechanisms; and integrating per-step effort routers within E3 stages. We release our framework and benchmark to encourage work on an efficiency that engineers already practice: knowing, quickly, when a problem is easy. More broadly, we view task-aware execution as one facet of 

engineering-grounded AI (EGAI)—agents whose effort is matched to, and validated against, the engineering reality of the task (Yin, 2026). 

Author contributions Junjie Yin: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft. Xinyu Feng: Methodology, Validation, Writing – review & editing. 23 Acknowledgements 

The authors thank CURENT engineering research center, Microsoft Research. 

Disclosure statement 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

Funding 

This research received no specific grant. 

Data availability statement 

The data and code that support the findings of this study are openly available in the GitHub repository Do AI Agents Know When a Task Is Simple? Toward Complexity-Aware Reasoning and Execution at https://github.com/eejyin/Do-AI-Agents-Know -When-a-Task-Is-Simple-Toward-Complexity-Aware-Reasoning-and-Execution .The repository provides the reference implementation of E3, the MSE-Bench bench-mark, and the LLM-Case real-model validation harness—including the vendored MIT-licensed toml tasks, the hidden acceptance graders, and the measured oracle of Ta-ble 7—together with the power-flow case study and the scripts that regenerate every table and figure in this paper. All simulated results are deterministic given the reported random seed ( 20260712 ); the LLM-Case token and latency measurements depend on the model provider and are therefore reported per run. 

References 

Ali, A., Yin, J., Li, F., & Cui, H. (2025). Pathway toward an open source ecosystem in power systems: A blueprint for collaborative innovation and software sustainability. IEEE Electrification Magazine , 13 (2), 58–67. Allen, J. F., Schubert, L. K., Ferguson, G., Heeman, P., Hwang, C. H., Kato, T., . . . Traum, D. R. (1995). The TRAINS project: a case study in building a conversational planning agent. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 7 (1), 7–48. Arle, J. E., & Carlson, K. W. (2021). Medical diagnosis and treatment is NP-complete. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 33 (2), 297–312. Baki, B., Bouzid, M., Ligeza, A., & Mouaddib, A.-I. (2006). A centralized planning technique with temporal constraints and uncertainty for multi-agent systems. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 18 (3), 331–364. Bannour, W., Maalel, A., & Ben Ghézala, H. H. (2023). Emergency management case-based reasoning systems: a survey of recent developments. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 35 (1), 35–58. Challa, J. S., Goyal, P., Kokandakar, A., Mantri, D., Verma, P., Balasubramaniam, S., & Goyal, N. (2022). Anytime clustering of data streams while handling noise and concept drift. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 34 (3), 399–429. Chen, L., Zaharia, M., & Zou, J. (2023). FrugalGPT: How to use large language models while reducing cost and improving performance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05176 .

24 Chen, X., Xu, J., Liang, T., He, Z., Pang, J., Yu, D., . . . Yu, D. (2024). Do NOT think that much for 2+3=? on the overthinking of o1-like LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.21187 .Chrpa, L., Pilát, M., & Gemrot, J. (2022). Planning and acting in dynamic environments: iden-tifying and avoiding dangerous situations. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 34 (6), 925–948. Dannenhauer, D., Muñoz-Avila, H., & Cox, M. T. (2021). Expectations for agents with goal-driven autonomy. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 33 (5), 867–889. Estlin, T. A., Chien, S. A., & Wang, X. (2001). Hierarchical task network and operator-based planning: two complementary approaches to real-world planning. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 13 (4), 379–395. Fahad, S., She, B., Yin, J., Li, F., Cui, H., & Bo, R. (2025). A data-driven adaptive control approach for enhancing the dynamic response of VSGs in varying grid conditions. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery .Fink, E., & Blythe, J. (2005). Prodigy bidirectional planning. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 17 (3), 161–200. Fox, S., & Leake, D. B. (2001). Introspective reasoning for index refinement in case-based reasoning. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 13 (1), 63–88. Graves, A. (2016). Adaptive computation time for recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.08983 .Grislin-Le Strugeon, E., de Oliveira, K. M., Thilliez, M., & Petit, D. (2022). A systematic map-ping study on agent mining. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence ,

34 (2), 189–214. Guerin, F. (2023). Projection: a mechanism for human-like reasoning in artificial intelligence. 

Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 35 (8), 1269–1293. Gupta, N., Ahirwal, M. K., & Atulkar, M. (2024). Development of human decision making model with consideration of human factors through reinforcement learning and prospect utility theory. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 36 (7), 1003– 1019. Hagendorff, T., & Fabi, S. (2024). Why we need biased AI: how including cognitive biases can enhance AI systems. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 36 (8), 1885–1898. Hayes-Roth, B. (1996). A domain-specific software architecture for a class of intelligent patient monitoring agents. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 8 (2), 149– 171. Jiang, S., Wang, Y., Wang, D., Yin, J., et al. (2020). Reliability assessment of distribution network considering differentiated end-users demand for reliability. In Proceedings of the 2020 international conference on smart grid and energy engineering (sgee). 

Jimenez, C. E., Yang, J., Wettig, A., Yao, S., Pei, K., Press, O., & Narasimhan, K. (2024). SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world GitHub issues? In International con-ference on learning representations (iclr). 

Karlan, B., & Allen, C. (2024). Engineered wisdom for learning machines. Journal of Experi-mental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 36 (2), 257–272. Koenig, S., & Liu, Y. (2002). The interaction of representations and planning objectives for decision-theoretic planning tasks. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelli-gence , 14 (4), 303–326. Kojima, T., Gu, S. S., Reid, M., Matsuo, Y., & Iwasawa, Y. (2022). Large language models are zero-shot reasoners. In Advances in neural information processing systems (neurips). 

Kong, B., Zhu, J., Wang, S., Yin, J., et al. (2023). Comparative study of the transmission capacity of grid-forming converters and grid-following converters. Energies .Leake, D. B. (1996). Experience, introspection and expertise: learning to refine the case-based reasoning process. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 8 (3-4), 319–339. Lightman, H., Kosaraju, V., Burda, Y., Edwards, H., Baker, B., Lee, T., . . . Cobbe, K. (2023). 

25 Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20050 .Lu, H., Zhuang, Z., Chen, L., Yin, J., et al. (2022). Optimal scheduling of multi-energy flow of CCHP based on matrix modeling of energy hub. Machine Building & Automation .Lü, S., Zhang, T., Xu, Y., Zhou, W., & Lai, Y. (2024). Combining bounded solving and controllable randomization for approximate model counting. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 36 (7), 1075–1088. Madaan, A., Tandon, N., Gupta, P., Hallinan, S., Gao, L., Wiegreffe, S., . . . Clark, P. (2023). Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems (neurips). 

Moreira, L. H., & Ralha, C. G. (2023). Method for evaluating plan recovery strategies in dynamic multi-agent environments. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intel-ligence , 35 (8), 1225–1249. Muennighoff, N., Yang, Z., Shi, W., Li, X. L., Fei-Fei, L., Hajishirzi, H., . . . Hashimoto, T. (2025). s1: Simple test-time scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.19393 .Murdock, J. W., & Goel, A. K. (2008). Meta-case-based reasoning: self-improvement through self-understanding. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 20 (1), 1–36. Ong, I., Almahairi, A., Wu, V., Chiang, W.-L., Wu, T., Gonzalez, J. E., . . . Stoica, I. (2024). RouteLLM: Learning to route LLMs with preference data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18665 .Osta-Vélez, M., & Gärdenfors, P. (2024). Analogy as a search procedure: a dimensional view. 

Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 36 (7), 1135–1154. Percassi, F., Gerevini, A. E., Scala, E., Serina, I., & Vallati, M. (2023). Improving domain-independent heuristic state-space planning via plan cost predictions. Journal of Experimen-tal & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 35 (6), 849–875. Primiero, G., Ceolin, D., & Doneda, F. (2025). A computational model for assessing experts’ trustworthiness. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 37 (1), 131– 162. Ray, K. S., Paul, S., & Saha, D. (2018). Preorder-based triangle: a modified version of bilattice-based triangle for belief revision in nonmonotonic reasoning. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 30 (5), 665–690. Schick, T., Dwivedi-Yu, J., Dessì, R., Raileanu, R., Lomeli, M., Zettlemoyer, L., . . . Scialom, T. (2023). Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Advances in neural information processing systems (neurips). 

Schurz, G., & Thorn, P. D. (2024). Escaping the no free lunch theorem: a priori advantages of regret-based meta-induction. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence ,

36 (1), 87–119. Shinn, N., Cassano, F., Berman, E., Gopinath, A., Narasimhan, K., & Yao, S. (2023). Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems (neurips). 

Siddiqi, S. A. (2024). A novel structure-exploiting encoding for SAT-based diagnosis. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 36 (6), 939–952. Snell, C., Lee, J., Xu, K., & Kumar, A. (2024). Scaling LLM test-time compute optimally can be more effective than scaling model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314 .Sotnik, G. (2020). The doubly-bounded rationality of an artificial agent and its ability to represent the bounded rationality of a human decision-maker in policy-relevant situations. 

Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 32 (5), 727–749. Stott, B. (1974). Review of load-flow calculation methods. Proceedings of the IEEE , 62 (7), 916–929. Tinney, W. F., & Hart, C. E. (1967). Power flow solution by newton’s method. IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems , PAS-86 (11), 1449–1460. Veloso, M., Carbonell, J., Pérez, A., Borrajo, D., Fink, E., & Blythe, J. (1995). Integrating planning and learning: the PRODIGY architecture. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 7 (1), 81–120. 

26 Wallace, R. J., & Freuder, E. C. (2025). Replaceability and a simple substitutability hierar-chy for constraint satisfaction problems. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 37 (8), 1553–1600. Wang, G., Xie, Y., Jiang, Y., Mandlekar, A., Xiao, C., Zhu, Y., . . . Anandkumar, A. (2023). Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 .Wang, L., Ma, C., Feng, X., Zhang, Z., Yang, H., Zhang, J., . . . Wen, J.-R. (2024). A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Science , 18 (6), 186345. Wang, X., Wei, J., Schuurmans, D., Le, Q., Chi, E., Narang, S., . . . Zhou, D. (2023). Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In International con-ference on learning representations (iclr). 

Wang, Y., Qiu, J., Qi, X., Juan, X., Shi, J., Zhao, Z., . . . Wang, M. (2026). Learning agent routing from early experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.07180 .Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Ichter, B., Xia, F., . . . Zhou, D. (2022). Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Advances in neural information processing systems (neurips). 

Xi, Z., Chen, W., Guo, X., He, W., Ding, Y., Hong, B., . . . others (2023). The rise and potential of large language model based agents: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864 .Xu, W., Zhang, W., Hu, Y., Yin, J., et al. (2022). Multi energy flow optimal scheduling model of advanced adiabatic compressed air energy storage. Transactions of China Electrotechnical Society .Yang, J., Hou, B., Wei, W., Bao, Y., & Chang, S. (2026). Ares: Adaptive reasoning effort selection for efficient LLM agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.07915 .Yang, Y., Okhuegbe, S. N., Zhang, J., Bhandari, A., Zhang, Z., Wang, H., . . . Liu, Y. (2026). PVSizer: An open-source Python framework for PV and BESS sizing and impact analysis in distribution networks. IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications .Yao, S., Yu, D., Zhao, J., Shafran, I., Griffiths, T. L., Cao, Y., & Narasimhan, K. (2023). Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. In Advances in neural information processing systems (neurips). 

Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K., & Cao, Y. (2023). ReAct: Syn-ergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International conference on learning representations (iclr). 

Yin, J. (2026). Engineering-grounded artificial intelligence (EGAI): Anchoring artificial in-telligence in engineering reality. (Manuscript) Yin, J., Wang, J., You, J., Chen, H., & Shi, W. (2021). Integrated energy system optimal operation in coal district with hydrogen heavy trucks. Frontiers in Energy Research , 9 ,607–621. Zhang, W., Xu, W., Hu, Y., & Yin, J. (2022). Multi energy flow optimal scheduling model of compressed air energy storage based on matrix modeling of energy hub. In Proceedings of the 2022 4th international conference on power and energy technology (icpet) (pp. 789–794). Zhao, Y., & Hernández-Orallo, J. (2025). The impact of sociality regimes on heterogeneous cooperative-competitive multi-agent reinforcement learning: a study with the predator-prey game. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence , 37 (7), 1159–1174. Zhou, H., Tan, Z., Zhang, Z., Fan, Y., Lin, Y., Kang, L., . . . Yin, Z. (2026). Select-then-solve: Paradigm routing as inference-time optimization for LLM agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.06753 .

27