1
Integrating Novelty and Surprise for Experience
Prioritization and Exploration in Image-Based
Reinforcement Learning
Hoda Yamani, Henry Williams, Bruce A. MacDonald
Abstract—Sample efficiency is a central challenge in reinforce-
ment learning (RL), particularly in image-based domains where
agents must learn from high-dimensional visual inputs. Traditional
sampling often relies on random or suboptimal experience selec-
tion, leading to redundant updates and slow learning. Improving
efficiency requires mechanisms that prioritize informative experiences
while also encouraging effective exploration. Prioritized Experience
Replay (PER) addresses part of this challenge by reusing high-
value transitions, while intrinsic rewards promote the exploration
of novel or uncertain states. However, their integration has not
been extensively studied. This paper introduces Novelty and Sur-
prise Prioritized Experience Replay (NSPER), which uses novelty
to capture underrepresented states and surprise to expose gaps in
the agent’s understanding of the environment. We further extend
this with NSPER+R, integrating these signals as intrinsic rewards
to jointly improve replay quality and exploration. Experiments on
DeepMind Control Suite tasks show that NSPER and NSPER+R
improve training efficiency and convergence speed compared to
existing methods in image-based RL.
Keywords—Reinforcement learning, prioritized experience replay,
sample efficiency, novelty, surprise, intrinsic rewards, continuous
control, image-based control.
I. INTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown great promise in
image-based applications, allowing agents to learn directly
from visual input [1], [2]. This paradigm has been widely
applied in domains such as gaming [3], robotics [4], and
autonomous driving [5], where vision serves as the primary
source of environmental feedback. However, high-dimensional
image data introduces redundancy, high memory demands, and
substantial computational overhead, making policy learning
more complex and resource-intensive [6]. Since RL inherently
relies on large volumes of interaction data, improving sample
efficiency is critical [7]. A promising direction is to prioritize
informative experiences during training and to guide explo-
ration toward those experiences that provide the most learning
value. This prioritization can be guided by intrinsic learning
signals that highlight which transitions are the most useful for
learning [8].
Inspired by human cognition, where intrinsic signals foster
curiosity [9], [10] and guide memory systems to prioritize
novel or salient experiences [11], [12], RL agents can adopt
similar mechanisms to enhance exploration and accelerate
learning. Such signals provide a foundation for both directing
Robot Learning Team and CARES Robotics Lab, Department of Electrical,
Computer, and Software Engineering, University of Auckland, Auckland, New
Zealand. Corresponding author: hyam650@aucklanduni.ac.nz.
exploratory behavior and selecting the most informative expe-
riences during training [13], [14], thereby improving sample
efficiency in two complementary ways. First, they can be
formulated as intrinsic rewards, encouraging agents to acquire
diverse and informative experiences that accelerate policy
refinement [15]. Second, they can be used as prioritization
scores within experience replay, enabling agents to focus on
transitions with the highest learning potential.
Among intrinsic signals, novelty and surprise have proven
especially effective as intrinsic rewards [16]. Novelty reflects
the unfamiliarity of a state, driving exploration toward under-
represented or unexplored regions [17], [18]. Surprise, on the
other hand, arises when outcomes deviate substantially from
predictions, exposing gaps in the agent’s environmental model
and its limited ability to generalize from past experiences [19].
Combining these two signals enables agents to identify regions
that require further learning and adjust their exploration strate-
gies, resulting in more efficient and targeted exploration [20],
[21].
Prioritized Experience Replay (PER) is a well-established
approach in RL that exploits such intrinsic signals within the
replay buffer to improve sample efficiency [22]. In its original
form, which we refer to as TD-PER, transitions are prioritized
based on the temporal difference (TD) error, which measures
the discrepancy between predicted and actual outcomes fol-
lowing an agent’s action. While effective in discrete action
spaces, TD-PER struggles in continuous control environments
[23], [24]. To overcome these limitations, several extensions
have been proposed, including augmenting TD error with
auxiliary signals or using biologically inspired mechanisms for
prioritization [24]–[27]. Despite these advances, integrating in-
trinsic rewards with PER in image-based RL remains limited.
For instance, the Contrastive Curiosity Learning Framework
(CCLF) [27] uses curiosity to prioritize surprising augmented
inputs. However, the broader use of intrinsic rewards as
scoring signals for experience prioritization remains largely
underexplored.
To address this gap, we propose NSPER, a novel pri-
oritization method that uses two distinct intrinsic signals,
novelty and surprise, to guide experience selection within
PER. By combining these signals to guide sampling, NSPER
identifies diverse and informative transitions with high learning
potential, improving the quality of replayed experiences. We
further introduce NSPER+R, an extension of NSPER that
integrates novelty and surprise not only for prioritization
but also as intrinsic rewards. This dual mechanism improves
arXiv:2608.17373v1  [cs.LG]  18 Aug 2026


2
Fig. 1: Schematic overview of Novelty and Surprise Prioritized Experience Replay (NSPER).
experience selection and exploratory behavior, leading to faster
convergence and more generalizable policies. To evaluate
our approach, we integrate it into PixelTD3, an image-based
variant of the TD3 algorithm [28], and assess its performance
on challenging tasks from the DeepMind Control Suite [29],
demonstrating promising improvements in complex, high-
dimensional visual environments. The model architecture is
illustrated in Fig. 1. The implementation is publicly available
at https://github.com/UoA-CARES/NSPER.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
1) We introduce NSPER, a novel approach that uses in-
trinsic rewards as prioritization signals within PER to
improve sample efficiency in image-based RL.
2) We extend this idea in NSPER+R, which uses novelty
and surprise both for prioritization and as intrinsic
rewards, further enhancing exploration and policy learn-
ing.
3) We provide a comprehensive evaluation of different pri-
oritization strategies and their integration with intrinsic
rewards, analyzing their impact on training efficiency
and learning performance.
4) We conduct an ablation study to isolate the individual
contributions of novelty and surprise, as well as their
combined effect when used with intrinsic rewards.
II. RELATED WORKS
Experience prioritization and intrinsic motivation are key
strategies for improving sample efficiency and exploration in
RL. Prior work has explored various mechanisms for identify-
ing informative experiences and guiding agents toward novel
or surprising transitions, providing a foundation for methods
that combine these ideas to enhance learning in complex
environments.
A. Experience Prioritization Methods
PER methods enhance sample efficiency by assigning higher
sampling probability to transitions with greater learning poten-
tial [30]. TD-PER [22], a common variant, ranks transitions
based on TD error, under the assumption that transitions
with larger TD errors are less familiar and therefore more
informative. However, in continuous high-dimensional spaces,
small perturbations in actions or observations can lead to
large fluctuations in value estimates, even for well-learned
transitions, making TD error a noisy and unstable prioritization
signal [23]. This sensitivity makes TD error a noisy and un-
reliable prioritization signal, motivating alternative strategies
that offer more stable and informative learning signals in
continuous control tasks [31], [32].
To address these limitations, LA3P [25] decouples learning
signals by assigning low TD-error transitions to the actor to
stabilize policy updates and high TD-error transitions to the
critic to improve value estimation. Another method [30] pri-
oritizes recent transitions with low TD error, thereby focusing
on up-to-date experiences, but this risks catastrophic forgetting
by discarding older yet valuable data. Model-Augmented PER
(MaPER) [24] incorporates auxiliary signals derived from
learned environmental dynamics to complement the TD error,
thereby improving the identification of important experiences.
Despite these enhancements, all of these methods primarily
rely on the TD error as the primary prioritization criterion.
In contrast, Reward Prediction Error (RPE) prioritization
[26] introduces an alternative signal inspired by biological
learning. By measuring the discrepancy between expected and
actual rewards, RPE provides informative feedback on its
prediction accuracy, allowing it to adjust its policies and en-
hance decision-making over time [33]. Similarly, our method
proposes a novel prioritization strategy that uses alternative
intrinsic signals, fostering exploration and emphasizing unfa-
miliar transitions.
B. Intrinsic Motivation Strategies
Intrinsic motivation has been widely explored in RL to
encourage agents to explore and learn beyond extrinsic rewards
[15]. This approach encourages agents to seek out novel states
and behaviors within the environment [27], [34]. Several in-
trinsic motivation mechanisms have been proposed, including
state novelty [16], state prediction errors [16], uncertainty
about outcomes [35], and environment dynamics [36]. Among
these, novelty and surprise enable more focused and effi-
cient learning by directly targeting meaningful opportunities,
guiding exploration toward unfamiliar states and significant


3
prediction errors, and outperforming methods that rely solely
on uncertainty or environmental dynamics [21].
Novelty encourages visiting rarely encountered states, pro-
moting a broader understanding of the environment [17].
Surprise is measured through prediction errors in environment
dynamics, such as next-state errors and state transition diver-
gences [13], [19]. Combining novelty and surprise captures
complementary aspects of agent-environment interaction, im-
proving exploration and representation learning [17], [18] and
allowing better balance between exploration and exploitation
in complex tasks [20].
Despite these advances, integrating intrinsic motivation
signals into memory prioritization mechanisms remains an
ongoing challenge. Several recent studies have focused on
combining curiosity-based metrics with experience replay to
further refine prioritization strategies.
C. Integrating Intrinsic Signals in Experience Replay
Recent studies have explored the incorporation of intrinsic
motivation into memory prioritization. Curiosity-driven experi-
ence prioritization (CDP) [37] prioritizes trajectories that lead
to rare goal states, ensuring the agent focuses on underexplored
areas. However, CDP is based on the replay of hindsight
experiences (HER) [38], which limits its applicability to
goal-oriented tasks. Augmented Curiosity-Driven Experience
Replay (ACDER) [39] also integrates curiosity signals into
HER but remains restricted to goal-conditioned exploration.
A more relevant approach, CCLF [27], introduces a self-
supervised prioritization mechanism in image-based RL.
CCLF selects surprising augmented inputs to enhance sample
efficiency, but it focuses primarily on representation learning
rather than on optimizing experience selection for policy
improvement.
Our method extends these insights by integrating novelty
and surprise into experience prioritization, ensuring that se-
lected transitions support both exploration and policy opti-
mization. By combining intrinsic rewards with a structured
prioritization mechanism, it overcomes the limitations of PER
and leverages intrinsic motivation to enable more effective
learning in challenging environments
III. METHODOLOGY
This section outlines the components underlying our ap-
proach, beginning with a review of PER, PixelTD3, and the
computation of novelty and surprise signals. We then introduce
our framework, NSPER, and its extension, NSPER+R.
A. PER
PER improves sample efficiency by replaying transitions
with higher learning potential. Transitions in the buffer B are
stored as:
Bi = (si, ai, ri, si+1),
(1)
where i indexes the time step. The priority of each transition
is defined as:
σi = |δi| + ϵ,
(2)
In the standard variant, TD-PER, δi is the TD error, and ϵ > 0
ensures non-zero priority.
Transitions are sampled according to:
pi =
σα
i
P
k σα
k
(3)
wi =

1
|B| pi
β
(4)
where pi favors transitions with higher priority σi, and wi
corrects for the bias introduced by non-uniform sampling.
Here, α controls prioritization sharpness, and β compensates
for sampling bias. While TD-PER defines σi using TD error,
PER is flexible and allows alternative prioritization signals by
redefining σi.
B. PixelTD3
PixelTD3 is an image-based extension of TD3 [28], inspired
by SACAE [40] and extended in NaSATD3 [21]. PixelTD3
employs a convolutional autoencoder that maps raw observa-
tions st into a compact latent representation z. This latent vec-
tor is shared between the actor and critic networks, ensuring
that policy learning is grounded in a consistent feature space.
The encoder–decoder is jointly trained with a reconstruction
loss that preserves the structural content of the input images
while maintaining task-relevant features.
Unlike SACAE, which trains separate encoders for actor
and critic, PixelTD3 uses a single shared autoencoder that is
updated end-to-end at every step, including both convolutional
and linear layers. This provides a stable and compact represen-
tation for policy learning. We adopt this setup as the backbone
of NSPER (see Fig. 1). Complete architectural specifications
of the encoder, decoder, actor, critics, and predictive ensemble
are reported in Table III.
C. Novelty And Surprise Computation
Novelty measures how different an observation is from what
the agent has already encoded. It is estimated by reconstructing
the input st through the autoencoder and comparing it to
the original observation. Let ˆst = Dec(Enc(st)) denote the
reconstruction of st. The novelty score is then defined as the
complement of the Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) between
st and ˆst:
Novelty(st) = 1 −SSIM(st, ˆst).
(5)
A higher value indicates that the observation is less well-
reconstructed, and therefore more novel to the agent. Fig. 1
illustrates how novelty is obtained from the autoencoder
reconstruction error of the input image.
Surprise measures the deviation between the agent’s pre-
dicted and observed dynamics. It is computed in latent space
using an ensemble of dynamics models Pρ, which predict the
next latent state ˆzt+1 given the current latent representation zt
and action at:
ˆzt+1 = Pρ(zt, at).
(6)
Surprise is defined as the mean squared error between the
predicted and observed latent states:
Surprise(st, at) = MSE(zt+1, ˆzt+1).
(7)
As illustrated in Fig. 1, this signal corresponds to the mismatch
between the latent representation of the observed next state


4
and the ensemble prediction. The ensemble consists of M
models trained with mean squared error loss, and averaging
their predictions reduces variance and improves stability under
non-stationary encoder updates.
Novelty and Surprise Combination: Combining nov-
elty and surprise reward signals encourages more targeted
exploration of informative regions within the environment.
This integration forms a new intrinsic signal, referred to as
the Novelty-Surprise Signal (NSS). The NSS(s, a), derived
from (5) and (7), captures the joint contribution of novelty and
surprise and is formulated as:
NSS(st, at) = Novelty(st) + Surprise(st, at)
(8)
D. NSPER: Novelty and Surprise Prioritization
We propose a prioritization strategy that leverages novelty
and surprise as intrinsic signals to guide experience replay.
Rather than relying on the TD error, as in standard PER,
NSPER replaces δi in (2) with the Novelty–Surprise Signal
NSS(s, a) from (8). The priority assigned to each transition is
therefore defined as:
σt = |NSS(st, at)| + ϵ,
(9)
where ϵ > 0 ensures all transitions remain eligible for replay.
These priorities are then used in the sampling equations (3)
and (4) to compute transition probabilities and importance
weights. By emphasizing transitions with higher novelty and
surprise, NSPER favors diverse and informative experiences
that better support critic training. The parameter α regulates
the strength of this prioritization, ensuring that informative
transitions are emphasized without over-concentrating sam-
pling on a few extreme cases. This balance allows NSPER to
prioritize informative experiences while maintaining diversity
in the sampled transitions.
E. Enhancing Exploration with Intrinsic Rewards
Intrinsic rewards are agent-generated signals that promote
exploration, especially when extrinsic rewards are sparse or
delayed [8]. In our approach, we define the intrinsic reward
using novelty and surprise (8) as:
rint(st, at) = NSS(st, at)
(10)
As depicted in Fig. 1, the NSS is used both to prioritize
experiences during replay and to define the intrinsic reward
signal. The total reward at each step combines extrinsic and
intrinsic components:
rt = rext + rint
(11)
We refer to the full version of our framework as NSPER+R,
which integrates intrinsic rewards with prioritized experi-
ence replay. This variant improves learning by prioritizing
transitions that contribute to both task success and deeper
environmental understanding. Algorithm 1 summarises the
full procedure for NSPER and its intrinsic-reward variant
NSPER+R.
Algorithm
1
NSPER and NSPER+R with NSS (Nov-
elty–Surprise Signal)
1: Inputs: PER exponents α, β, batch size m, small ε > 0
2: Initialize: actor Θ, critic θ, encoder–decoder (Enc, Dec), replay
buffer B, priorities {σi}
3: for each environment step t do
4:
Observe state st; select action at (with exploration noise);
receive rext and st+1
5:
Novelty: Novelty(st) ←1 −SSIM
 st, Dec(Enc(st))

6:
Surprise:
obtain
latents
(zt+1, z′
t+1)
and
set
Surprise(st, at) ←MSE(z′
t+1, zt+1)
7:
NSS: NSS(st, at) ←Novelty(st) + Surprise(st, at)
8:
Intrinsic reward: rint ←NSS(st, at)
9:
Total reward: rt ←
(
rext + rint,
NSPER+R
rext,
NSPER
10:
Push (st, at, rt, st+1, NSS(st, at)) into B
11:
Set priority for new item: σnew ←|NSS(st, at)| + ε
12:
for each update step do
13:
Sample indices I of size m with PER:
p(i) =
σα
i
P
k σα
k
14:
IS weights: w(i) ←

1
|B|·p(i)
β
(optionally normalize
by maxj∈I w(j))
15:
Update critic/actor: compute losses on batch, weight by
w(i), update θ, Θ
16:
Refresh
priorities: for each i
∈
I, set σi
←
|NSS(si, ai)| + ε
17:
end for
18: end for
IV. EXPERIMENTS
This section describes the experimental setup, simulation
tasks, algorithmic settings, and baseline methods used in our
evaluation, and then presents an analysis of the learning per-
formance of NSPER, NSPER+R, and competing approaches.
A. Experimental Setup
We evaluate our algorithms and baselines on five image-
based continuous control tasks from the DeepMind Control
Suite (DMC) [29]: Cartpole-Balance, Finger-Spin, Ball-in-
Cup, Walker-Walk, and Cheetah-Run. These environments
constitute the standard benchmark suite for visual reinforce-
ment learning and have been widely used in prior pixel-
based studies [21], [41], [42]. This set provides representative
coverage of balance, manipulation, and locomotion tasks and
offers sufficient diversity for assessing prioritization strategies
in image-based continuous control. Visual examples of the
environments are given in Fig. 2, and their key properties are
summarised in Table I.
All algorithms are trained under a unified experimental
configuration following established practice in continuous-
control evaluation. Training settings, optimization parameters,
evaluation schedules, and replay specifications are listed in
Table II. Using identical configurations across all tasks en-
sures that performance differences arise from the prioritization
mechanism rather than from hyperparameter choices or imple-
mentation bias. NSPER and NSPER+R employ a shared latent-
space architecture for representation learning, prediction, and


5
(a) Cartpole-Balance
(b) Finger-Spin
(c) Ball-in-Cup
(d) Walker-Walk
(e) Cheetah-Run
Fig. 2: Five continuous control tasks from the DeepMind Control Suite used in our evaluation.
TABLE I: Summary of DeepMind Control Suite tasks used in our experiments.
Task
Action Space
Objective
Primary Challenge
Type
Difficulty
Cartpole-Balance
[−1, 1]1
Stabilize the pole by moving the cart
horizontally.
Underactuated and highly unstable dynamics where
small errors rapidly lead to failure.
Classic Control
Low
Finger-Spin
[−1, 1]2
Maintain continuous rotation of a free-
floating object.
Requires fine torque modulation to sustain spin
without drift or loss of contact.
Manipulation
High
Ball-in-Cup
[−1, 1]2
Swing the ball and capture it inside the
cup.
Oscillatory motion requires precise timing and
well-coordinated control.
Manipulation
Medium–High
Walker-Walk
[−1, 1]6
Achieve stable forward locomotion.
Balancing and coordinating a bipedal body in an
inherently unstable locomotion regime.
Locomotion
Medium
Cheetah-Run
[−1, 1]6
Run forward at high speed.
High velocity amplifies instability, requiring strong,
consistent, and fast control.
Locomotion
Medium
TABLE II: Experimental setup for NSPER across DeepMind Control Suite environments.
Parameter
Value (Description)
Environments
Observation
84 × 84 × 3 RGB images, with 3 consecutive frames stacked
Reward Scale
Maximum episodic return of 1000 per task
Evaluation Metric
Average cumulative reward per step (computed using extrinsic rewards)
Implementation Details
Replay Buffer Capacity
1,000,000 transitions
Batch Size
128 (Mini-batch sampled from replay buffer)
Actor Learning Rate
1 × 10−4
Critic Learning Rate
1 × 10−3
Prioritization Exponent α
0.7 (Controls prioritization sharpness)
Importance-Sampling Exponent β
0.4 (Corrects sampling bias)
Training Steps
1 × 106 (Total environment steps)
Evaluation Frequency
Every 1 × 104 steps
Evaluation Episodes
10 (Episodes per evaluation checkpoint)
Random Seeds
5 (Independent runs with different seeds for environment and initialization)
TABLE III: Network architectures used in NSPER and NSPER+R.
Component
Input
Layers / Units
Activations
Output
Encoder
84 × 84 × 3 image
4 conv (32, 3 × 3) + FC(200)
ReLU (conv), tanh (FC)
Latent z ∈R200
Decoder
Latent z
Deconv mirror of encoder
ReLU, Sigmoid (final)
Image reconstruction
Actor (TD3)
z (opt. + vector obs)
FC(1024) →FC(1024)
ReLU, tanh (out)
Action ∈[−1, 1]d
Critics (TD3, ×2)
z∥a (opt. + vector obs)
FC(1024) →FC(1024)
ReLU
Scalar Q-value
Predictive Ensemble
zt∥at
FC(512) →FC(512)
ReLU
Pred. latent ˆzt+1
action-value estimation. The components of this architecture
are outlined in Table III.
B. Experimental Approach
To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach, we consider
two proposed variants, NSPER and NSPER+R:
NSPER: Uses novelty and surprise solely for replay prior-
itization, isolating their effect on experience selection.
NSPER+R: Extends NSPER by also incorporating novelty
and surprise as intrinsic rewards, combined with extrinsic
rewards (11), allowing us to assess their joint impact on
prioritization and exploration.
Baseline Algorithms: For comparison, we evaluate a range
of established methods within the PixelTD3 framework, which
differ in their replay strategies and use of intrinsic rewards.
All implementations share the same codebase for fairness.
Although CCLF was originally proposed with a pixel-based
SAC backbone, we adapt it to PixelTD3 for consistency. The
baselines include:
1) Uniform: Uniformly samples transitions from the buffer


6
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
NSPER+R
NSPER
TD-PER+R
TD-PER
RPE-PER+R
RPE-PER
Uniform+R
Uniform
CCLF
Fig. 3: Learning curves for continuous control tasks using PixelTD3. Solid lines represent the algorithm’s performance with
intrinsic rewards (+R), while dashed lines indicate performance without intrinsic rewards. Shaded regions denote the 95%
confidence interval across 5 runs.
without PER or intrinsic rewards [28], [43].
2) Uniform+R (NaSATD3): Uniform sampling with intrin-
sic rewards, equivalent to PixelTD3+R [21].
3) TD-PER: PER based on TD error [22], without intrinsic
rewards.
4) TD-PER+R: TD-PER augmented with intrinsic rewards.
5) RPE-PER: PER based on reward prediction error (RPE)
[26], without intrinsic rewards.
6) RPE-PER+R: RPE-PER extended with intrinsic re-
wards.
7) CCLF:
A
contrastive
learning-based
prioritization
method with intrinsic rewards to improve exploration
and representation learning [27].
This setup enables a comprehensive evaluation of NSPER
and NSPER+R against diverse baselines that vary in their use
of prioritization strategies and intrinsic rewards, providing a
robust comparison in image-based RL.
C. Learning Efficiency Analysis
The learning curves in Fig. 3 illustrate the learning ef-
ficiency of NSPER and baseline methods across five chal-
lenging DeepMind continuous control environments. These
curves depict the average evaluation reward over training steps,
providing insights into convergence speed and performance
differences among NSPER, NSPER+R, and the baseline algo-
rithms.
Dashed-line plots represent PixelTD3 with different replay
buffer sampling methods but without intrinsic rewards, while
solid-line plots of the same color correspond to the same
sampling methods with intrinsic rewards. These separate plots
directly compare how sampling strategies influence perfor-
mance with and without intrinsic rewards.
It is crucial to note that Baseline methods did not always
replicate the performance reported in prior work. Such devi-
ations are not uncommon in deep reinforcement learning and
can arise from factors such as environmental stochasticity, ini-
tialization randomness, and subtle implementation or runtime
differences. As emphasized by Henderson et al. [44], ensuring
fair comparison is essential; in our case, the relative ranking of
methods remained consistent across multiple runs, supporting
the robustness of our evaluations.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Performance results across various tasks in Fig. 3 show that
NSPER (red plot) results are better than baseline algorithms. It
enhances PixelTD3’s performance on four of five tasks while
achieving comparable results on the fifth task to the best-
performing methods among image-based RL approaches. Our
evaluation highlights the crucial role of novelty and surprise
signals in improving learning efficiency. In contrast, Uniform
sampling (orange plot) exhibits suboptimal performance across
all tasks, demonstrating that relying solely on a uniform expe-
rience buffer is insufficient. These findings suggest that Pix-
elTD3 could significantly benefit from integrating prioritized
sampling or intrinsic reward mechanisms, even in relatively
simple environments.


7
Incorporating prioritization strategies alongside intrinsic re-
wards improves performance across nearly all algorithms,
highlighting the advantages of these techniques in fostering
more robust and adaptive learning. In particular, NSPER+R
achieves the best results among the methods. While CCLF
(light green plot) consistently outperforms Uniform across all
tasks, its overall performance remains unremarkable. This sug-
gests that CCLF’s prioritization strategy differs fundamentally
from that of a prioritization buffer, and, as the results indicate,
it does not integrate well with PixelTD3.
In addition, the comparable performance of the RPE-PER
algorithm (blue plot) to NSPER across all tasks demonstrates
its potential as an effective prioritization method. However,
NSPER consistently achieves better results. These findings
indicate that using a complex prioritization scale in image-
based RL can be beneficial, while also reaffirming that novelty
and surprise signals are stronger heuristics for selecting infor-
mative experiences, ultimately contributing to a more sample-
efficient learning process.
A. Task-Specific Analysis
This section examines the performance of different meth-
ods across individual tasks, highlighting their strengths and
limitations in each environment.
In Cartpole-Balance (Fig. 3, plot a), a classic control task
requiring a cart to balance a pole, all methods using either
a prioritized buffer or intrinsic rewards perform well. This
suggests that PixelTD3 benefits from PER or intrinsic rewards,
even in simpler environments.
The Finger-Spin task, which involves manipulating an
object with a simulated finger, presents challenges due to
complex contact dynamics and sparse rewards. As shown in
Fig. 3, plot b, NSPER variants outperform other methods,
emphasizing the importance of novelty and surprise signals
for learning efficiency. NSPER+R, which integrates intrinsic
rewards with PER, further enhances performance. Comparing
TD-PER (prioritization based on TD error) with Uniform+R
(intrinsic rewards without prioritization) reveals that intrinsic
rewards yield better results in this environment than PER
alone. However, TD-PER+R underperforms relative to TD-
PER, suggesting that conflicting signals from the TD error
and novelty-surprise signals can hinder efficiency. In contrast,
NSPER+R aligns both prioritization and intrinsic rewards
using the same features, thereby improving sample efficiency.
The Ball-in-Cup task, characterized by sparse rewards
granted only upon successfully catching the ball, provides
another challenging test. In (Fig. 3, plot c), NSPER+R outper-
forms other approaches, demonstrating the benefits of com-
bining novelty and surprise for prioritization with intrinsic
rewards. While Uniform+R performs well, NSPER+R and
RPE-PER+R achieve consistently better results, reinforcing
that properly aligning prioritization with intrinsic rewards
enhances performance.
The Walker-Walk environment, which requires controlling
a bipedal walker to maintain dynamic balance, presents a
complex, multi-stage control challenge despite offering dense
rewards. (Fig. 3, plot d) shows that NSPER+R and RPE-
PER+R improve performance, highlighting the importance
of context-aware experience selection. In contrast, TD error-
based PER leads to suboptimal results even when combined
with intrinsic rewards. This suggests that prioritizing solely
based on high TD error can misguide learning, as such
experiences may not always be the most informative.
In Cheetah-Run (Fig. 3, plot e), TD-PER performs best,
but NSPER closely follows, demonstrating its adaptability to
high-speed locomotion tasks. This result indicates that priori-
tization strategies should be tailored to specific environments,
as more straightforward prioritization methods can sometimes
be more effective. However, TD-PER exhibits inconsistency,
performing well in Cheetah-Run but poorly in Walker-Walk,
as noted in prior studies [23]. In contrast, NSPER maintains
stable performance across diverse tasks, suggesting it provides
a more reliable prioritization strategy.
B. Ablation Study: The Role of Novelty and Surprise in
Prioritization
This study evaluates various prioritization strategies to
isolate the individual and combined effects of novelty and
surprise. NoveltyPER prioritizes experiences based solely on
novelty, SurprisePER based solely on surprise, and NSPER
jointly leverages both signals. Solid curves denote variants that
additionally use intrinsic rewards, while dashed curves show
performance without them. As shown in Fig. 4, prioritization
based on both novelty and surprise outperforms using either
signal alone. This combination improves experience selection
and, when also incorporated as intrinsic rewards, encourages
more effective exploration. The results highlight the comple-
mentary nature of novelty and surprise in RL. Furthermore,
integrating these signals as intrinsic rewards yields additional
performance gains by promoting a more balanced selection of
experiences, ultimately enhancing policy learning.
In the Cheetah-Run task, prioritization alone is sufficient,
and incorporating surprise as an intrinsic reward negatively
impacts performance. Another key observation is that Nov-
eltyPER outperforms SurprisePER in most tasks, suggesting
that novelty-based prioritization, which encourages exploration
of diverse states, is more beneficial than surprise-based pri-
oritization, which focuses on unexpected transitions. Addi-
tionally, the performance of SurprisePER and SurprisePER+R
remains similar in most cases, indicating that adding surprise
as an intrinsic reward does not significantly contribute to
performance improvements. However, when both novelty and
surprise are used in prioritization and intrinsic rewards, the
agent achieves the best overall performance, demonstrating
their complementary roles in improving learning efficiency.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work, we addressed the challenge of sample in-
efficiency in image-based RL by introducing NSPER and
its extension NSPER+R, which integrate novelty and sur-
prise as signals for replay prioritization and, in the case of
NSPER+R, also as intrinsic rewards. This dual mechanism
improves both replay quality and exploration, leading to faster
convergence and more generalizable policies. Through an
extensive evaluation of the DeepMind Control Suite using the


8
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
NSPER+R
NSPER
NoveltyPER+R
NoveltyPER
SurprisePER+R
SurprisePER
Fig. 4: Ablation results comparing experience prioritization based on novelty, surprise, and their combination, with and without
intrinsic rewards. Shaded regions represent the 95% confidence interval over five runs.
PixelTD3 backbone, we showed that NSPER and NSPER+R
outperform existing baselines, improving training efficiency in
complex image-based tasks. Ablation studies further confirmed
the complementary contributions of novelty and surprise to
prioritization and exploration. Our research highlights the
importance of using internal stimuli and enhanced sampling
buffers to improve RL systems.
Future work should explore additional intrinsic motivators
and adaptively weight novelty and surprise. Our ablation
study indicates that these signals impact learning efficiency
differently, suggesting that dynamically adjusting their balance
could refine the agent’s exploration strategy.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Zheng and Y. Song, “Effective representation learning is more
effective in reinforcement learning than you think,” in 2024 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2024,
pp. 9176–9182.
[2] Y. Huang, P. Peng, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhai, H. Xu, and Y. Tian, “Simoun: Syn-
ergizing interactive motion-appearance understanding for vision-based
reinforcement learning,” in 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023, pp. 176–185.
[3] V. Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. Lillicrap, T. Harley,
D. Silver, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Asynchronous methods for deep rein-
forcement learning,” in International conference on machine learning.
PMLR, 2016, pp. 1928–1937.
[4] S. Ferraro, T. Van de Maele, P. Mazzaglia, T. Verbelen, and B. Dhoedt,
“Computational optimization of image-based reinforcement learning for
robotics,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 19, p. 7382, 2022.
[5] A. Scorsoglio, R. Furfaro, R. Linares, and B. Gaudet, “Image-based deep
reinforcement learning for autonomous lunar landing,” in AIAA Scitech
2020 Forum, 2020, p. 1910.
[6] L. Chen, K. Lee, A. Srinivas, and P. Abbeel, “Improving computational
efficiency in visual reinforcement learning via stored embeddings,” Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 26 779–
26 791, 2021.
[7] F. E. Dorner, “Measuring progress in deep reinforcement learning sample
efficiency,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04881, 2021.
[8] A. G. Barto, “Intrinsic motivation and reinforcement learning,” Intrin-
sically motivated learning in natural and artificial systems, pp. 17–47,
2013.
[9] G. Baldassarre, “What are intrinsic motivations? a biological per-
spective,” in 2011 IEEE international conference on development and
learning (ICDL), vol. 2.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–8.
[10] E. L. Deci and R. M. Ryan, Intrinsic motivation and self-determination
in human behavior.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[11] D. Shohamy and R. A. Adcock, “Dopamine and adaptive memory,”
Trends in cognitive sciences, vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 464–472, 2010.
[12] E. K. Braun, G. E. Wimmer, and D. Shohamy, “Retroactive and graded
prioritization of memory by reward,” Nature communications, vol. 9,
no. 1, p. 4886, 2018.
[13] D. Pathak, P. Agrawal, A. A. Efros, and T. Darrell, “Curiosity-driven
exploration by self-supervised prediction,” in International conference
on machine learning.
PMLR, 2017, pp. 2778–2787.
[14] R. Houthooft, X. Chen, Y. Duan, J. Schulman, F. De Turck, and
P. Abbeel, “Vime: Variational information maximizing exploration,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 29, 2016.
[15] P.-Y. Oudeyer and F. Kaplan, “What is intrinsic motivation? a typology
of computational approaches,” Frontiers in neurorobotics, vol. 1, p. 6,
2007.
[16] M. Bellemare, S. Srinivasan, G. Ostrovski, T. Schaul, D. Saxton, and
R. Munos, “Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 29, 2016.
[17] A. Jaegle, V. Mehrpour, and N. Rust, “Visual novelty, curiosity, and
intrinsic reward in machine learning and the brain,” Current opinion in
neurobiology, vol. 58, pp. 167–174, 2019.
[18] M. Kubovˇc´ık, I. Dirgov´a Lupt´akov´a, and J. Posp´ıchal, “Signal novelty
detection as an intrinsic reward for robotics,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 8, p.
3985, 2023.
[19] J. Achiam and S. Sastry, “Surprise-based intrinsic motivation for deep
reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01732, 2017.
[20] H. Le, K. Do, D. Nguyen, and S. Venkatesh, “Beyond surprise: Improv-
ing exploration through surprise novelty.” in AAMAS, 2024, pp. 1084–
1092.
[21] D. Valencia, H. Williams, Y. Xing, T. Gee, M. Liarokapis, and B. A.
MacDonald, “Image-based deep reinforcement learning with intrinsi-


9
cally motivated stimuli: On the execution of complex robotic tasks,”
in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 587–594.
[22] T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou, and D. Silver, “Prioritized experience
replay,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05952, 2015.
[23] Y. Pan, J. Mei, A.-m. Farahmand, M. White, H. Yao, M. Rohani, and
J. Luo, “Understanding and mitigating the limitations of prioritized
experience replay,” in Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence.
PMLR,
2022, pp. 1561–1571.
[24] Y. Oh, J. Shin, E. Yang, and S. J. Hwang, “Model-augmented prioritized
experience replay,” in International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations, 2021.
[25] B. Saglam, F. B. Mutlu, D. C. Cicek, and S. S. Kozat, “Actor prioritized
experience replay,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00532, 2022.
[26] H. Yamani, Y. Xing, L. V. C. Ong, B. A. MacDonald, and H. Williams,
“Reward prediction error prioritisation in experience replay: The rpe-per
method,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.18093, 2025.
[27] C. Sun, H. Qian, and C. Miao, “Cclf: A contrastive-curiosity-driven
learning framework for sample-efficient reinforcement learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.00943, 2022.
[28] S. Fujimoto, H. Hoof, and D. Meger, “Addressing function approxi-
mation error in actor-critic methods,” in International conference on
machine learning.
PMLR, 2018, pp. 1587–1596.
[29] Y. Tassa, Y. Doron, A. Muldal, T. Erez, Y. Li, D. d. L. Casas, D. Budden,
A. Abdolmaleki, J. Merel, A. Lefrancq et al., “Deepmind control suite,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
[30] D. Zha, K.-H. Lai, K. Zhou, and X. Hu, “Experience replay optimiza-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08387, 2019.
[31] R. Carrasco-Davis, S. Lee, C. Clopath, and W. Dabney, “Uncertainty
prioritized experience replay,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09270, 2025.
[32] X.-H. Liu, Z. Xue, J. Pang, S. Jiang, F. Xu, and Y. Yu, “Regret
minimization experience replay in off-policy reinforcement learning,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 34, pp. 17 604–
17 615, 2021.
[33] R. Simmons-Edler, B. Eisner, D. Yang, A. Bisulco, E. Mitchell, S. Se-
ung, and D. Lee, “Reward prediction error as an exploration objective
in deep rl,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08189, 2019.
[34] A. Aubret, L. Matignon, and S. Hassas, “A survey on intrinsic motivation
in reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.06976, 2019.
[35] K. Li, A. Gupta, A. Reddy, V. H. Pong, A. Zhou, J. Yu, and S. Levine,
“Mural: Meta-learning uncertainty-aware rewards for outcome-driven re-
inforcement learning,” in International conference on machine learning.
PMLR, 2021, pp. 6346–6356.
[36] Y. Seo, L. Chen, J. Shin, H. Lee, P. Abbeel, and K. Lee, “State
entropy maximization with random encoders for efficient exploration,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2021, pp.
9443–9454.
[37] R. Zhao and V. Tresp, “Curiosity-driven experience prioritization via
density estimation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.08039, 2019.
[38] M. Andrychowicz, F. Wolski, A. Ray, J. Schneider, R. Fong, P. Welinder,
B. McGrew, J. Tobin, O. Pieter Abbeel, and W. Zaremba, “Hindsight
experience replay,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 30, 2017.
[39] B. Li, T. Lu, J. Li, N. Lu, Y. Cai, and S. Wang, “Acder: Augmented
curiosity-driven experience replay,” in 2020 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2020, pp. 4218–4224.
[40] D. Yarats, A. Zhang, I. Kostrikov, B. Amos, J. Pineau, and R. Fergus,
“Improving sample efficiency in model-free reinforcement learning
from images,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 12, 2021, pp. 10 674–10 681.
[41] I. Kostrikov, D. Yarats, and R. Fergus, “Image augmentation is all
you need: Regularizing deep reinforcement learning from pixels,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.13649, 2020.
[42] M. Laskin, A. Srinivas, and P. Abbeel, “Curl: Contrastive unsupervised
representations for reinforcement learning,” in International conference
on machine learning.
PMLR, 2020, pp. 5639–5650.
[43] W. Fedus, P. Ramachandran, R. Agarwal, Y. Bengio, H. Larochelle,
M. Rowland, and W. Dabney, “Revisiting fundamentals of experience
replay,” in International conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2020,
pp. 3061–3071.
[44] P. Henderson, R. Islam, P. Bachman, J. Pineau, D. Precup, and D. Meger,
“Deep reinforcement learning that matters,” in Proceedings of the AAAI
conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 32, no. 1, 2018.
