Title: [AAFLOW+] Stateful Operator Abstraction with Zero-Copy Distributed KV Cache Orchestration for Multi-Agent Workflows

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.10987v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 01:32:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# [AAFLOW+] Stateful Operator Abstraction with Zero-Copy Distributed KV Cache Orchestration for Multi-Agent Workflows 

# Arup Kumar Sarker Alexander James Halpern Mills Staylor 

University of Virginia, Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative Charlottesville, VA, USA djy8hg@virginia.edu halperna22@gmail.com qad5gv@virginia.edu 

# Gregor von Laszewski Geoffrey Fox Yue Cheng 

Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative University of Virginia Charlottesville, VA, USA laszewski@gmail.com vxj6mb@virginia.edu mrz7dp@virginia.edu 

# Aymen Alsaadi Shantenu Jha 

Rutgers University Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory Princeton, NJ, USA aymen.alsaadi@rutgers.edu shantenu.jha@rutgers.edu 

## ABSTRACT 

Multi-agent LLM systems increasingly integrate retrieval, plan-ning, and reasoning, but remain fundamentally text-centric, re-quiring agents to repeatedly recompute shared context through expensive prefill. Although single-request inference is known to be accelerated by KV-cache management, it is usually restricted to local serving scopes. We introduce AAFLOW+, a stateful ex-tension of agentic workflow operators that makes KV cache a first-class distributed systems object. AAFLOW+ builds processes into communication-aware graphs that concurrently optimize data, prompts, and reusable model state. It also provides operators for KV materialization, transfer, fork, composition, and eviction. Its run-time enables zero-copy, transfer-aware execution, allowing agents to reuse long context without recomputation. AAFLOW+ reduces TTFT by up to 50.2 ×, achieves up to 7.63 × reduced multi-agent com-pute cost at 16-agent scale, reduces KV memory by 1.72–6.10 ×, and increases throughput by more than 7.74 ×, based on an analytical cost model parameterized by empirical hardware microbenchmarks. The results demonstrate that KV transmission outperforms recom-putation on networks with moderate to high bandwidth, making sure KV-state sharing greatly increases efficiency in multi-agent LLM systems by replacing text passing. 

PVLDB Reference Format: 

Arup Kumar Sarker, Alexander James Halpern, Mills Staylor, Gregor von Laszewski, Geoffrey Fox, Yue Cheng, Aymen Alsaadi, and Shantenu Jha. [AAFLOW+] Stateful Operator Abstraction with Zero-Copy Distributed KV Cache Orchestration for Multi-Agent Workflows. PVLDB, 14(1): XXX-XXX, 2020. doi:XX.XX/XXX.XX 

PVLDB Artifact Availability: 

The source code, data, and/or other artifacts have been made available in 

AAFLOW/stateful_agentic_algebra directory at https://github.com/aru pcsedu/AAFLOW. 

> This work is licensed under the Creative Commons BY-NC-ND 4.0 International License. Visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ to view a copy of this license. For any use beyond those covered by this license, obtain permission by emailing info@vldb.org. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to the VLDB Endowment. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, Vol. 14, No. 1 ISSN 2150-8097. doi:XX.XX/XXX.XX

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

Large language models are increasingly deployed as agentic sys-tems that interleave retrieval, reasoning, tool invocation, and mem-ory across multiple stages. Frameworks such as ReAct, Reflex-ion, AutoGen, and DSPy expand this design space, while RAG improves factual grounding by conditioning generation on exter-nal data [ 16 , 20 , 38 , 41 , 42 ]. However, as these workflows become deeper and more collaborative, a fundamental systems bottleneck emerges: agents continue to communicate primarily through text .Even when shared context has already been computed, downstream agents must replay it through costly prefill computation, repeatedly reconstructing identical model state. This inefficiency is closely tied to the treatment of the key-value (KV) cache, a central object in LLM inference and a key component of AI memory [ 22 ]. Recent serving systems such as vLLM [ 19 ], SGLang [ 47 ], DistServe, MemServe, Mooncake, ChunkAttention, KVCOMM, and RelayCaching [ 12 , 15 , 29 , 43 , 44 , 49 ] demonstrate that KV cache management is critical for reducing latency and improving throughput. These systems optimize KV reuse through techniques such as block-level allocation, prefix sharing, and de-coupled prefill and decode stages. However, their scope is largely confined to single-request or single-cluster execution. They do not provide a workflow-level abstraction for explicitly transferring, branching, and reusing KV state across multiple agents, which im-pacts pipeline execution. In planner–retriever–solver workflows, multiple agents often operate over the same long context prefix. In tree-of-thought or debate settings, agents branch from shared prefixes and explore alternative reasoning paths. In collaborative RAG, agents independently retrieve overlapping evidence and re-process similar context. In all cases, current systems serialize shared state back into text, transforming a stateful execution problem into repeated prompt replay. The result is increased time-to-first-token (TTFT), duplicated computation, higher framework overhead, and limited control over state placement and reuse. Recent frameworks like AAFLOW [ 34 ], model agentic work-flows as compositions of distributed operators and reduce orches-tration overhead via communication-aware DAG execution and zero-copy data transfer. However, AAFLOW remains data-centric and does not expose internal model state, such as KV cache, as part of its abstraction. We introduce AAFLOW+ , a stateful ex-tension that elevates KV cache to a first-class distributed systems arXiv:2607.10987v1 [cs.DC] 13 Jul 2026 object. AAFLOW+ extends operator abstraction from dataflow to 

stateflow , enabling explicit modeling of KV-state lifecycle through operators for materialization, transfer, fork, restricted composition, and eviction (Figure 1). This lets the compiler choose between text passing, KV reuse, state transfer, and eviction, shifting optimiza-tion from prompt construction to explicit state management. Our runtime makes the KV cache transportable by using explicit meta-data, zero-copy communication, and transfer-aware scheduling. By separating metadata from tensor buffers and using Arrow-based formats, the system minimizes serialization costs and enables effi-cient state transfer between distributed components [ 2]. AAFLOW+ ensures correctness by enforcing compatibility on model identity, positional encoding, and execution history, allowing safe prefix reuse and controlled state composition. 

Figure 1: Layered architecture of stateful operator abstrac-tion. The design extends AAFLOW-style operator execution with explicit KV-state materialization, fork, transfer, merge, and eviction. 

We evaluate AAFLOW+ on GPU clusters using Mistral-7B and Llama-3-8B. Results show that stateful execution significantly im-proves performance over text-based orchestration. AAFLOW+ re-duces TTFT by up to 50.2 × at long context, achieves up to 7.63 ×

lower multi-agent latency at 16-agent scale, reduces peak KV mem-ory by 1.72 ×–6.10 ×, and improves throughput by over 7.74 ×.Transfer–recompute analysis shows that KV transfer dominates recomputation on moderate-to-high bandwidth networks, while consistency experiments preserve deterministic output agreement. These results show that workflow-level KV-state sharing reduces latency, memory pressure, and framework overhead while comple-menting existing LLM serving systems. 

## 2 BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 2.1 From Agentic Dataflow to Stateful Execution 

Agentic large language model (LLM) applications are increasingly organized as multi-stage workflows in which retrieval, reasoning, tool use, memory access, and response generation interact dynami-cally. While frameworks like DSPy treat language-model applica-tions as compositional programs that can be optimized through compilation [ 16 , 41 ], systems like AutoGen and LangGraph offer flexible multi-agent programming abstractions. Nonetheless, the majority of agent frameworks continue to be largely text-centric, with agents exchanging serialized strings representing tool outputs, recovered excerpts, intermediate summaries, and natural language messages. Although this approach is practical at the application layer, it conceals a more serious inefficiency in the system. A down-stream agent typically needs to re-tokenize and re-prefill the same context before it can produce fresh output when it receives text that has previously been handled by an upstream model invocation. Instead of viewing agentic workflows as loosely connected frame-work callbacks, AAFLOW [ 34 ] treated them as compilable dis-tributed programs. In AAFLOW, a workflow is represented as a set of operators, 

𝑊 = {𝑂𝑝 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑑 , 𝑂𝑝 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑣𝑒 , 𝑂𝑝 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 , 𝑂𝑝 𝑚𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑟 𝑦 , 𝑂𝑝 𝑢𝑝𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑡 }, (1) where each operator is defined as 

𝑂𝑝 𝑖 = (𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑂 𝑖 , 𝑓 𝑖 , 𝑃 𝑖 ). (2) Here, 𝐼 𝑖 and 𝑂 𝑖 denote the input and output objects, 𝑓 𝑖 is the trans-formation function, and 𝑃 𝑖 is the communication pattern associated with the operator. This abstraction allows the runtime to lower an agentic workflow into an execution graph, 

𝐺 = 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑖𝑙𝑒 (𝑊 ), (3) where communication patterns such as broadcast, shuffle, reduce, and embarrassingly parallel execution become explicit parts of the execution plan. The key insight of this paper is that the same principle should apply not only to external workflow data, such as documents, embeddings, and vector indices, but also to inter-nal model execution state . The state created during LLM prefill is typically locked inside a local serving runtime in current agentic systems. Because of this, multi-agent workflows maximize the flow of data throughout the model, but they are unable to optimize the transportation and reuse of the key-value (KV) cache, the model’s most costly intermediate artifact. 

Figure 2: Textflow forces downstream agents to replay con-text, whereas stateflow transfers reusable KV execution state. 

## 2.2 Cost of Text-Based Agent Communication 

Consider a two-agent workflow where an upstream agent gets documents and creates a lengthy context, and a downstream agent uses that context to perform reasoning in order to comprehend the limitations of text-based communication. In existing systems, text is usually emitted by the upstream agent and consumed as a new prompt by the downstream agent. Before generating its first output 

> 2

token, the downstream model must make a prefill pass over the whole context if the prompt length is 𝐿 . We denote this cost as 

𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 (𝐿 ). (4) The total execution time for a single agent invocation can therefore be approximated as 

𝑇 𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 = 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 (𝐿 ) + 𝑇 𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒 (𝑌 ) + Ω, (5) where 𝑇 𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒 (𝑌 ) is the cost of autoregressively generating an out-put sequence of length 𝑌 , and Ω captures framework overhead from scheduling, serialization, synchronization, and data move-ment. The inefficiency becomes more severe in multi-agent settings. If 𝑘 agents consume the same context independently, the system may pay the prefill cost 𝑘 times: 

𝑇 𝑘 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 ≈ 𝑘 · 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 (𝐿 ) + 

> 𝑘

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑇 𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒 (𝑌 𝑗 ) + Ω𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 . (6) 

Figure 3: Text-based multi-agent execution duplicates prefill computation across branches that share the same context. 

Tree-of-Thought reasoning, multi-agent argument, self-consistency sampling, speculative planning, and parallel retrieval synthesis all exhibit this execution pattern. Although the process in each sce-nario has a shared prefix or shared context, text-based communi-cation compels each branch to separately recreate the model state. This redundancy is shown in Figure 3. The execution system han-dles each branch as a separate model invocation even though the agents conceptually share a shared context. Poor branch factor scalability is the outcome, particularly for long-context workloads where time-to-first-token (TTFT) is dominated by prefill. 

## 2.3 KV Cache as Reusable Execution State 

Serving systems have already demonstrated that performance de-pends on appropriate KV-cache management. To manage KV cache using block-level paging and minimize memory fragmentation [ 19 ], vLLM provides PagedAttention. To enhance KV-cache reuse across structured language-model programs, SGLang introduces Radix-Attention [ 47 ]. These systems show that effective LLM execution depends on the KV cache. Their optimizations, however, mostly function within a serving runtime. A universal distributed abstrac-tion for exposing KV cache as a schedulable state object across multi-agent workflows is not offered by them. Our work is motivated by this distinction. We don’t try to replace the current serving systems. Rather, we investigate the possibil-ity of lifting KV cache from a local serving optimization into a distributed workflow abstraction. According to this perspective, a multi-agent workflow should be able to manage partitions, buffers, and interim outputs in the same manner as distributed data systems may materialize, transmit, fork, reuse, and ultimately evict KV state. 

## 2.4 Motivating Stateflow Example 

Figure 2 illustrates the difference between textflow and stateflow. Agent B needs to prefill the textual context that Agent A emits in the textflow scenario. Agent A produces a reusable KV state object in addition to a logical output in the stateflow scenario. Then, instead of paying for complete prompt replay, Agent B can resume execution from the transferred state, simply paying for state movement and continuation. By contrasting the cost of state transfer with the cost of text replay, the anticipated benefit may be stated. Text-based execution is beneficially replaced by stateful execution when 

𝑇 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 𝑓 𝑒𝑟 (𝐾𝑉 ) + 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑒 + Ω𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 < 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 (𝐿 ) + Ω𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 . (7) Equation 7 defines the central systems condition studied in this paper. Multi-agent workflows can lower TTFT and overall latency by working over state rather than text if transferring and resuming from KV state is less expensive than replaying the prompt. 

## 3 STATEFUL OPERATOR ABSTRACTION 3.1 Extending the Operator Model 

Each operator is described by AAFLOW [ 34 ] as a tuple with inputs, outputs, a transformation function, and a communication pattern. For data-centric workflow steps including embedding, retrieval, reasoning, memory lookup, and index updating, this approach is adequate. It does not, however, specifically differentiate between model execution state and ordinary data. Because KV cache is connected to model settings, token placements, attention layout, device placement, and branch lineage, it is distinct from regular data. Reusing it inappropriately can modify model meaning, while discarding it unnecessarily produces wasteful processing. We there-fore extend the original operator definition into a stateful operator: 

𝑂𝑝 𝑠 𝑖 = (𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑂 𝑖 , 𝑆 𝑖𝑛 𝑖 , 𝑆 𝑜𝑢𝑡 𝑖 , 𝑓 𝑖 , 𝑃 𝑖 , 𝜎 𝑖 ). (8) Here, 𝐼 𝑖 and 𝑂 𝑖 remain the ordinary data inputs and outputs, while 

𝑆 𝑖𝑛 𝑖 and 𝑆 𝑜𝑢𝑡 𝑖 represent input and output state objects. The function 

𝑓 𝑖 describes the logical transformation performed by the operator, and 𝑃 𝑖 describes the communication pattern used to execute it. The new term 𝜎 𝑖 denotes the state policy associated with the operator. This policy determines whether state is transferred, aliased, forked, merged, pinned, evicted, or recomputed. Making state movement transparent to the compiler is the goal of Equation 8. The runtime only observes strings and tensors moving between operators in a text-based workflow. The runtime also detects state dependencies in a stateful workflow, which may affect placement and scheduling. Thus, the execution graph becomes 

𝐺 𝑠 = (𝑉 , 𝐸 𝑑 , 𝐸 𝑠 ), (9) where 𝑉 is the set of operators, 𝐸 𝑑 is the set of data edges, and 𝐸 𝑠 

is the set of state edges. Data edges describe conventional work-flow dependencies, while state edges describe KV-cache reuse and movement. 

## 3.2 KV State Object 

A KV cache object must carry enough information to determine whether it can be safely reused. We define a state object as 

𝑆 𝐾𝑉 = (𝑀, Θ, 𝐵, Π, Λ, Γ), (10) 

> 3

where 𝑀 is the model identifier, Θ is the model and tokenizer configuration, 𝐵 is the set of KV blocks, Π is positional metadata, 

Λ is lineage metadata, and Γ describes placement and ownership. The block set 𝐵 is represented as 

𝐵 = {𝑏 1, 𝑏 2, . . . , 𝑏 𝑚 }, (11) where each block has the form 

𝑏 𝑗 = (𝐾 𝑗 , 𝑉 𝑗 , ℓ 𝑗 , 𝑟 𝑗 , 𝑑 𝑗 ). (12) The key and value tensors in this representation are 𝐾 𝑗 and 𝑉 𝑗 , the layer index is ℓ𝑗 , the token-position range covered by the block is 𝑟 𝑗 ,and the device or memory domain where the block is now located is 

𝑑 𝑗 . The idea behind this block-level representation is similar to that of paged KV-cache management in vLLM, which manages cache storage in blocks as opposed to a single monolithic sequence [19]. The lineage term Λ is particularly important for multi-agent workflows. It records whether a state was produced by direct prefill, by transfer, by fork, or by restricted composition. This prevents the runtime from treating all KV states as interchangeable. Two states are compatible only if they satisfy the predicate 

𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑡 (𝑆 𝑎 , 𝑆 𝑏 ) = ⊮[𝑀 𝑎 = 𝑀 𝑏 ] · ⊮[Θ𝑎 = Θ𝑏 ] · ⊮[Π𝑎 ∼ Π𝑏 ], (13) where Π𝑎 ∼ Π𝑏 denotes positional compatibility. This predicate is conservative by design: when compatibility cannot be established, the runtime falls back to text replay or recomputation. 

## 3.3 Stateful Operator Semantics 

The abstraction introduces a family of KV-state operators that ex-tend the original AAFLOW workflow. The first operator is materi-alization: 

𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒 (𝑥, 𝑀 ) → 𝑆 𝐾𝑉 . (14) This operator creates a reusable KV state object after consuming a tokenized context 𝑥 and a model 𝑀 . Materialization distinguishes between the cost of decoding future tokens and the cost of process-ing the input context, as contrast to regular generation. The second operator is transfer: 

𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 𝑓 𝑒𝑟 (𝑆 𝐾𝑉 , 𝑛 𝑎 , 𝑛 𝑏 ) → 𝑆 ′ 

> 𝐾𝑉

. (15) A state object is moved or aliased from node 𝑛 𝑎 to node 𝑛 𝑏 by this operation. Depending on where the source and destination are located, its communication pattern could be point-to-point transfer, RDMA, or a collective operation. The transfer operator modifies the state’s location and ownership metadata but not its logical content. The third operator is fork: 

𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑘 (𝑆 𝐾𝑉 , 𝑘 ) → { 𝑆 (1) 

> 𝐾𝑉

, 𝑆 (2) 

> 𝐾𝑉

, . . . , 𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐾𝑉

}. (16) The abstraction procedure that makes branching effective is called a fork. It generates several logical offspring of a common prefix state. When branches diverge, copy-on-write behavior is ap-plied, even if these descendants may initially share the same physi-cal blocks. Self-consistency sampling, Tree-of-Thought reasoning, multi-agent argument, and parallel plan exploration all directly benefit from this operation. The fourth operator is restricted merge: 

𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒 (𝑆 1, 𝑆 2, 𝜇 ) → 𝑆 ∗. (17) The merge discipline is specified by the policy 𝜇 . Since arbitrary KV-cache merging is not typically semantically correct, we pur-posefully limit this operation. Merge is only permitted under spe-cific structural limitations, such as prefix-compatible concatena-tion, segment-aware assembly, or reduction through a summariz-ing model invocation, because KV state is position-dependent and model-layout-dependent. KV cache is not treated as a general tensor object by this cautious approach. 

## 3.4 Cost Model for Stateful Execution 

The operator abstraction is useful only if it exposes an optimization target. For text-based execution, the cost of a branch with context length 𝐿 can be written as 

𝑇 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 = 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 (𝐿 ) + 𝑇 𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒 (𝑌 ) + Ω𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 . (18) For stateful execution, the corresponding cost is 

𝑇 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 = 𝑇 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 𝑓 𝑒𝑟 (𝑆 𝐾𝑉 ) + 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑒 + 𝑇 𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒 (𝑌 ) + Ω𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 . (19) The system should choose stateful execution when 

𝑇 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 < 𝑇 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 . (20) Expanding this condition gives 

𝑇 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 𝑓 𝑒𝑟 (𝑆 𝐾𝑉 ) + 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑒 + Ω𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 < 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 (𝐿 ) + Ω𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 . (21) For a branching workflow with 𝑘 branches sharing a prefix, the text-based cost is approximately 

𝑇 𝑘 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 = 𝑘 · 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 (𝐿 ) + 

> 𝑘

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑇 𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒 (𝑌 𝑗 ) + Ω𝑘 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 . (22) With KV-state fork, the prefix is materialized once: 

𝑇 𝑘 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 = 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 (𝐿 ) + 𝑇 𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑘 (𝑆 𝐾𝑉 , 𝑘 ) + 

> 𝑘

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑇 𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒 (𝑌 𝑗 ) + Ω𝑘 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 . (23) The expected savings therefore come from replacing repeated prefill with a single materialization and a cheaper fork operation: 

Δ𝑇 = (𝑘 − 1)𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 (𝐿 ) − 𝑇 𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑘 (𝑆 𝐾𝑉 , 𝑘 ) − ( Ω𝑘 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 − Ω𝑘 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 ). (24) This equation makes the performance intuition precise. Stateful execution is most beneficial when the shared context is long, the branch factor is high, and state management overhead remains lower than the avoided prefill cost. 

## 3.5 Correctness and Validity Constraints 

The inability to treat KV cache like arbitrary data is a major problem in stateful abstraction. Only model-specific and sequence-specific requirements make it valid. As a result, three invariants must be maintained in every state transition. Model compatibility must first be maintained. One incompati-ble model, tokenizer, or attention layout cannot reuse a KV state created by another. Secondly, positional compatibility needs to be maintained. Fork and merge operations must maintain position se-mantics since attention state is linked to word order and positional encoding. Third, lineage consistency needs to be maintained. In order for the scheduler to assess if future reuse is safe, a branch formed from a prefix state must document its pedigree. Equation 10 contains metadata terms that encode these requirements. The ab-straction does not try unsafe reuse if any invariant fails. Rather, 

> 4

the runtime resorts to text-based recomputation. The abstraction is useful for real systems because of this cautious design, which is crucial for accuracy. AAFLOW is extended from dataflow to stateflow by the stateful abstraction. The abstraction treats the KV cache as a structured state object with explicit operators, compatibility criteria, placement metadata, and cost models rather than as an opaque local artifact inside the serving engine. This makes it possible for the runtime and compiler to decide when to materialize, transfer, fork, merge, or evict model state. The outcome is a workflow architecture that allows for the effective reuse of costly LLM prefill computation while maintaining the analyzability of operator-driven execution. 

## 4 DESIGN 

We design a distributed runtime that extends AAFLOW’s operator-driven execution to a stateful execution system capable of managing KV cache across multi-agent workflows. The key principle is to treat model execution state as a first-class distributed object, rather than a temporary artifact limited to one node. The runtime integrates a stateful compiler, a distributed KV-state layer, and a state-aware scheduler to coordinate data and state dependencies, as well as transfer/recompute decisions. 

## 4.1 Stateful Workflow Compilation 

The first step in our system is to extend the compilation process from a purely data-driven model to a hybrid data-state model. Given a workflow 𝑊 , AAFLOW compiles it into an execution graph 𝐺 . We extend this to construct a stateful execution graph : 𝐺 𝑠 = (𝑉 , 𝐸 𝑑 , 𝐸 𝑠 ),where 𝑉 represents operator nodes, 𝐸 𝑑 captures data dependencies, and 𝐸 𝑠 captures state dependencies corresponding to KV cache flow. Unlike traditional DAGs that only encode data movement, 𝐺 𝑠 

exposes KV-state propagation. State edges allow the scheduler to reason about locality, reuse, and transfer before recomputing shared context. This enables optimizations such as avoiding recomputation when compatible state already exists elsewhere in the system. 

## 4.2 KV State Representation 

To support distributed state management, we define a structured representation of KV cache. Conceptually, KV cache consists of a sequence of blocks: 

𝐾𝑉 = {𝐵 1, 𝐵 2, . . . , 𝐵 𝑛 } (25) where each block corresponds to a segment of the input sequence and contains key-value tensors 𝐵 𝑖 = (𝐾 𝑖 , 𝑉 𝑖 , 𝑙 𝑖 , 𝑝 𝑖 ). Here, 𝐾 𝑖 and 𝑉 𝑖 

denote the key and value tensors, 𝑙 𝑖 identifies the layer index, and 

𝑝 𝑖 encodes the positional range associated with the block. We use Apache Arrow [ 3] to represent metadata and block layouts in a columnar, zero-copy format. This allows different components of the system to share state descriptors without serialization over-head. The underlying tensor buffers are transferred using high-performance communication frameworks such as UCX [ 35 , 39 ]and MPI [ 6], ensuring efficient movement across nodes. The trans-port subsystem overlaps communication and computation, allow-ing operators to begin execution as KV blocks arrive, improving throughput. 

## 4.3 KV State Lifecycle 

Figure 4: Lifecycle of KV state from creation to reuse and eviction. 

The lifecycle of KV state in our system follows a structured se-quence, as shown in Figure 4. State is first materialized during the prefill phase of LLM execution, then can be forked to enable parallel reasoning (e.g., in Tree-of-Thought workflows). Forked states may be transferred between nodes for distributed processing. When com-putation resumes, agents use the transferred state directly, avoiding redundant prefill. If necessary, state may be evicted due to memory constraints or policy. This lifecycle promotes state reuse, reduces redundant computation, and maintains execution flexibility. 

## 4.4 Memory Management and Eviction 

Managing KV state for multiple agents strains GPU memory. To mitigate this, a cost-aware eviction strategy balances reuse with memory use. Each state receives a score based on reuse and size. States with lower scores are evicted first under memory pressure, similar to distributed cache strategies but tailored for KV state reuse. To mitigate GPU memory exhaustion, the runtime implements a heuristic eviction strategy prioritizing KV states based on a com-bination of memory footprint size and historical reuse frequency. Formalizing and profiling optimal distributed KV eviction policies remains future work. 

## 4.5 Stateful Workflow Composition 

A stateful workflow composes data operators and state operators into a single graph. A typical branching workflow can be written as 

𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒 → 𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑘 →{𝑂𝑝 (1)

> 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛

, . . . , 𝑂𝑝 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛

} → 𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒 . (26) This expression models a workflow where shared context is pro-cessed once, branched into multiple reasoning paths, and later merged under specific policies. As illustrated in Figure 5, dashed edges indicate KV state flow and solid edges denote standard op-erator outputs. Explicitly distinguishing state from data depen-dencies enables the compiler to schedule reasoning branches effi-ciently, avoiding redundant prefill computation for each branch. Currently, restricted merge supports strictly non-overlapping se-quential concatenation of independent branch outputs, avoiding arbitrary tensor-blending of divergent attention states, which would violate positional encoding semantics. 

## 4.6 State-Aware Scheduling 

The scheduler plays a central role in determining how state is man-aged during execution. For each operator, the scheduler evaluates 

> 5

Figure 5: Stateful operator abstraction composes conven-tional reasoning operators with KV-state operators. Dashed edges represent state dependencies. 

whether to transfer existing state or recompute it from scratch. This decision is guided by a cost model: 

𝜋 (𝑆 ) =

(

transfer , if 𝑇 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 𝑓 𝑒𝑟 < 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 

recompute , otherwise (27) Here, 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 represents the cost of recomputing the state from input text. When transfer is cheaper, the system reuses existing state; otherwise, it falls back to recomputation. More generally, the scheduler optimizes the objective: min Í𝑖 𝑇 𝑖 + 𝜆 · 𝑀𝑒𝑚 𝑖 where 𝑇 𝑖 

is the execution time of operator 𝑖 , 𝑀𝑒𝑚 𝑖 is its memory footprint, and 𝜆 controls the trade-off between latency and memory usage. This formulation allows the system to adapt to different workloads and resource constraints. For example, in memory-constrained environments, the scheduler may choose to recompute state rather than store and transfer it. 

## 4.7 Runtime Integration 

The runtime extends the capabilities of existing LLM serving sys-tems like vLLM [ 18 ] and SGLang [ 48 ], which already manage KV caches efficiently on single nodes, to distributed workflows. Exe-cution involves four key stages: generating the stateful execution graph 𝐺 𝑠 , scheduling operators and state placement, executing op-erators with KV reuse when possible, and dynamically updating the state graph as states are created or consumed. This approach maintains compatibility with current model-serving infrastructure while supporting advanced distributed optimization. 

## 5 IMPLEMENTATION 5.1 Overview 

We implement the proposed stateful agentic abstraction as a dis-tributed runtime that extends AAFLOW with explicit support for KV-state orchestration. The implementation builds on the operator-driven execution model introduced in AAFLOW, where workflows are compiled into communication-aware execution graphs over distributed resources. In contrast to existing agent frameworks, which treat model execution as a black box, our system externalizes KV cache as a manipulable distributed state object. The system consists of four tightly integrated layers: a state-aware compiler, a KV-state manager, a transport subsystem, and an execution run-time (Figure 6). These components collectively enable the system to materialize, transfer, reuse, and evict KV state while preserving compatibility with existing LLM serving infrastructures such as vLLM [19] and SGLang [47]. 

Figure 6: System architecture illustrating the interaction be-tween compiler, runtime, KV state layer, and transport. 

## 5.2 Build Compiler and Execution Graph 

The compiler extends the workflow of AAFLOW compilation pro-cess by incorporating state dependencies into the execution graph. Given a workflow 𝑊 , the compiler constructs a stateful graph 

𝐺 𝑠 = (𝑉 , 𝐸 𝑑 , 𝐸 𝑠 ), where 𝐸 𝑑 represents data dependencies and 𝐸 𝑠 

represents KV-state dependencies. Each operator is instantiated as: 

𝑣 𝑖 = (𝑂𝑝 𝑠 𝑖 , R𝑖 , L𝑖 ) (28) where R𝑖 captures resource requirements and L𝑖 encodes lo-cality constraints derived from KV-state placement. During com-pilation, the system identifies shared context across agents and inserts explicit state operators such as 𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑘 and 𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 𝑓 𝑒𝑟 .This transformation enables the reuse of model execution state across agents rather than recomputation from text. The compila-tion process preserves the determinism guarantees of AAFLOW while extending its execution model to include stateflow alongside dataflow. 

## 5.3 KV-State Manager 

The KV-state manager is responsible for representing and maintain-ing KV cache across distributed resources. Inspired by block-based KV management in vLLM [ 19 ], the system partitions KV cache into fixed-size blocks to enable efficient reuse and transfer. Each KV state is represented as a collection of blocks with associated metadata, as defined in Section 3. Internally, the system maintains a distributed mapping: 

M : (𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 _𝑖𝑑, 𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 _𝑖𝑑 ) → ( 𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒, 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 ) (29) This mapping allows the runtime to locate KV blocks without scanning global state. The manager also tracks lineage information, ensuring that forked states maintain consistent ancestry relation-ships. Metadata is encoded using Apache Arrow [ 3], which provides a columnar, zero-copy representation that can be shared across com-ponents without serialization overhead. This design aligns with prior work demonstrating that zero-copy data exchange is critical for high-performance distributed pipelines. 

## 5.4 Transport Subsystem 

The transport subsystem enables efficient movement of KV state across nodes and devices. It leverages high-performance commu-nication frameworks such as UCX [ 35 ] and MPI [ 6 ] to perform zero-copy transfers of tensor buffers. Unlike traditional distributed systems that serialize objects into intermediate formats, our system transfers raw KV blocks directly between memory regions. Meta-data is transmitted separately using Arrow descriptors, while large tensor buffers are transferred using RDMA when available. The 

> 6

transfer cost is modeled as: 

𝑇 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 𝑓 𝑒𝑟 = |𝐾𝑉 |

𝐵𝑊 + 𝛿 (30) To reduce communication overhead, the system operates at block granularity and transfers only the subset of KV state required by downstream operators. This approach is particularly effective for prefix-based reuse, where only early segments of the sequence are needed. Additionally, the transport subsystem supports overlapping communication with computation. As KV blocks arrive, operators can begin partial execution, improving overall pipeline throughput. 

## 5.5 Execution Runtime 

The execution runtime orchestrates the execution of the compiled graph across distributed resources. It schedules operators based on both data availability and KV-state availability, ensuring that tasks are executed only when required inputs and state are ready. Each operator invocation interacts with the underlying LLM serving system through KV-aware APIs. Specifically, when execut-ing a reasoning operator, the runtime injects precomputed KV state into the model, bypassing the prefill stage and directly initiating decoding. This mechanism builds upon the KV reuse capabilities of systems such as vLLM and SGLang, extending them from single-node execution to distributed workflows [19, 47]. 

## 5.6 Fault Tolerance and Consistency 

Maintaining correctness in the presence of distributed state requires careful validation. Each KV state carries metadata that ensures com-patibility across operators. In particular, lineage tracking ensures that state is only reused in contexts where it remains semantically valid. When failures occur, the system can recover by recomputing state from the nearest valid prefix. This fallback mechanism ensures robustness without requiring full checkpointing of intermediate states. The proposed system generalizes agentic execution from a state-less, text-based model to a stateful, distributed model. By explicitly representing, transferring, and reusing KV cache, the system elimi-nates redundant prefill computation and enables scalable multi-agent workflows. The combination of state-aware compilation, structured state representation, and cost-driven scheduling forms the foundation for efficient stateful execution. 

## 5.7 Branching Optimization 

Branching workloads are particularly well-suited for stateful exe-cution. Consider a workflow that generates 𝑘 reasoning branches from a shared prefix. In text-based systems, each branch must inde-pendently process the full context: 

𝑇 𝑘 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 = 𝑘 · 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 (𝐿 ) (31) In contrast, our system computes the prefix once and then forks the resulting KV state: 

𝑇 𝑘 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 = 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 (𝐿 ) + 𝑘 · 𝑇 𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒 (32) Since decoding is significantly cheaper than prefill, this leads to substantial performance gains. Figure 5 illustrates this optimization. Restricted merge is used to append non-overlapping segments, rather than attempting to mathematically blend divergent parallel attention matrices, which would corrupt RoPE positional encodings. 

## 6 EVALUATION 

To isolate the performance of distributed KV-transfer from the variance of application-level framework overhead, we evaluate our abstraction using deterministic synthetic prompts and natural questions [ 17 ] datasets and a trace-driven analytical model parame-terized by rigorous empirical microbenchmarks (TTFT, multi-agent computing cost, transfer/recompute tradeoffs, memory footprint, throughput, and framework overhead). AAFLOW+ is also com-patible with vLLM, and SGLang backends 

## 6.1 Baselines 

We compare against representative systems from three categories: LLM serving, KV-cache optimization, and multi-agent orchestra-tion. 

(1) vLLM (PagedAttention) [ 19 ]: vLLM is a state-of-the-art LLM serving system that optimizes KV cache using block-based memory management and PagedAttention. It represents the strongest baseline for single-node KV reuse and is widely used in production. 

(2) SGLang (RadixAttention) [ 47 ]: SGLang improves KV reuse by identifying shared prefixes across structured language programs and exploiting radix-tree-style attention reuse. It provides a natural comparison for prefix-sharing optimizations. 

(3) DistServe [ 50 ]: DistServe is a distributed LLM serving system that decouples prefill and decode stages across nodes. While it improves resource utilization, it does not expose KV cache as a reusable distributed object across agents. 

(4) AAFLOW-text [34 ]: AAFLOW-text focuses on memory-efficient inference through offloading from RAG and scheduling techniques. It highlights that prefill from vectorstore through RAG could improve, but does not optimize inter-agent KV reuse. 

(5) Text-based Dense Prefil Orchestration (Sarathi-style) [1 ]: This baseline represents current agent frameworks where agents exchange text messages without KV reuse. Each agent performs independent prefill. 

(6) Communication-oriented KV-cache reuse (KVCOMM) [43 ]: KVCOMM shares reusable cache context across related agent inter-actions instead of fully replaying text prompts. Unlike AAFLOW+, it models KV communication without exposing a full workflow-level abstraction for state materialization, fork, transfer, restricted composition, and eviction. 

## 6.2 Metrics 

We evaluate systems using metrics that capture both model-level performance and system-level efficiency. 

Time-to-First-Token (TTFT):. TTFT measures the latency between request arrival and the generation of the first output token: 

𝑇𝑇 𝐹𝑇 = 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 + 𝑇 𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒 + Ω (33) Since prefill dominates TTFT for long contexts, reducing redundant prefill is critical. 

> 7

Aggregate Compute Cost: The aggregate compute cost is defined as: 

𝑇 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 + 𝑇 𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒 + Ω (34) 

Framework Overhead ( Ω): Following AAFLOW, we isolate sys-tem overhead as: 

Ω = 𝑇 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 − ( 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 + 𝑇 𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒 ) (35) This includes scheduling, communication, serialization, and syn-chronization costs. 

Throughput: Throughput is measured as tokens per second: 

𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑔ℎ𝑝𝑢𝑡 = Total tokens generated 

𝑇 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 

(36) 

Memory Footprint: We measure peak KV memory usage: 

𝑀𝑒𝑚 𝐾𝑉 = max 

> 𝑡

∑︁ 𝑖 

|𝐾𝑉 𝑖 (𝑡 )| (37) 

KV Reuse Ratio: To quantify reuse effectiveness, we define: 

𝑅𝑒𝑢𝑠𝑒 = Tokens served from KV cache Total tokens processed (38) 

Transfer Efficiency: We evaluate the ratio between transfer cost and avoided recomputation: 

𝐸 𝑓 𝑓 𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦 = 𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 − 𝑇 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 𝑓 𝑒𝑟 

𝑇 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 

(39) 

## 6.3 Experimental Setup 

All experiments are conducted on a distributed GPU cluster. 

Hardware: We use a cluster of 4–16 nodes, each equipped with NVIDIA A100 (80GB and 40GB), 32–64 CPU cores, and RDMA-enabled InfiniBand interconnects. 

Models and backend: The HF backend uses AutoTokenizer and 

AutoModelForCausalLM with deterministic decoding. KV meta-data is extracted from past_key_values ; tensors are not serialized by default. The measured real-model values used by the bench-mark matrix include prefill time, decode time, TTFT approximation, generated-token count, KV shape metadata, and KV byte size. 

Table 1: HF, vLLM, SGLang backend use below model cover-age in the completed run. 

Name HF model id Max Output HF model id context tokens Mistral Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 32,640 64 Llama3 Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct 8,128 64 Mistral was tested up to 32,640 context tokens so that con-text_tokens + output_tokens stayed within the configured 32,768 token window. Llama3 was tested up to 8,128 context tokens with 64 output tokens, matching the configured 8,192-token limit (Table -1). Our runtime integrates with the backend’s KV-cache APIs while extending them to support distributed state transfer. Communi-cation is implemented using UCX and NCCL. Mistral-7B, vLLM, and SGLang are licensed under Apache 2.0. Llama-3-8B is licensed under the Meta Llama 3 Community License. 

Cost and network parameters: For stateful runtime experiments, the configured state-transfer model uses measured KV bytes. Ex-periment 1 used bandwidth_bytes_per_sec = 25,000,000,000 ,equivalent to 25 GB/s or 200 Gbps, with network_latency_sec = 50us , resume_overhead_sec = 0.1ms , and very small framework overheads ( omega_state_sec = omega_text_sec = 50us ). Ex-periment 3 sweeps network bandwidth from 10 Gbps to 400 Gbps and uses both RDMA-like 10us and Ethernet-like 100us latency settings. 

## 6.4 Workloads and Topologies 

The benchmarked scenario is a shared-prefix agentic workflow, not independent stateless chat. The main topology is a parallel broadcast / Tree-of-Thought style DAG: 

root context → KV materialize → KV fork 

→ { agent 1, . . . , agent 𝑘 } → merge (40) A single root context is processed once, and 𝑘 downstream agents evaluate different reasoning paths using the same prefix. The multi-agent scaling experiment sweeps 𝑘 ∈ { 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 }. The main real-model runs use 𝑌 = 64 generated tokens per branch. This output length is important: AAFLOW+ primarily reduces prefill and TTFT. If 𝑌 were thousands of tokens, decode would dominate and the relative TTFT advantage would be smaller. The prompts are deter-ministic synthetic long-context prompts. They are used to control context length and branch count precisely. These experiments there-fore measure systems behavior—state reuse, transfer, memory, and overhead—rather than dataset answer quality. We evaluate three representative workloads: Multi-Agent Debate: 

multiple agents iteratively refine responses using shared context. 

Tree-of-Thought Reasoning: branching reasoning paths with shared prefixes. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG): agents share re-trieved context and perform downstream reasoning. It is not ex-pected to help independent short stateless prompts, because such prompts have no shared state to fork or transfer. Each workload varies in context length (1K–32K tokens), number of agents (2–16), and branching factor (2–16). 

## 6.5 Meaning of total latency 

The total_latency_sec field in these tables is a modeled aggre-gate workload cost, not the observed Slurm wall-clock runtime of the experiment script. For text baselines, the benchmark mul-tiplies measured per-prompt prefill and decode costs by the num-ber of branch instances and prompts. For example, Experiment 1 uses 16 agents, branch factor 8, and 32 prompts, so dense text passing is charged for 16 × 8 × 32 = 4096 full-context prefill/de-code executions. AAFLOW+ is charged for one shared material-ized state plus reused state transfers and continuations. Therefore large total_latency_sec values should be interpreted as aggre-gate work avoided by state reuse, not as the elapsed time of the Slurm job. 

## 6.6 Experiment 1: TTFT Reduction 

The first experiment measures time to first token (TTFT) as a func-tion of context length. Text-passing systems repeatedly rebuild the       

> 805000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 Context Length (tokens)
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> 4.0 TTFT (s)
> TTFT vs Context Length by Baseline AAFLOW+ aa fl ow_text dense_pre fi ll distserve_style kvcomm_pre fi xsglang_pre fi xvllm_local_pre fi x

Figure 7: Experiment-1: TTFT vs context length across mul-tiple baselines. The curves confirm that text baselines scale with context length, while AAFLOW+ grows slowly because branch cost follows the transfer/resume path rather than repeated prefill Table 2: Experiment-1: Mean TTFT reduction and Through-put with variation context grid and fixed 16 agents. 

Model Baseline Mean TTFT (s) Relative to AAFLOW+ Mistral AAFLOW+ 0.041 1.00 ×

Mistral dense prefill 2.017 49.2 × slower Mistral AAFLOW-text 2.057 50.2 × slower Mistral vLLM local prefix 0.437 10.7 × slower Mistral SGLang prefix 0.280 6.8 × slower Mistral KVCOMM 0.704 17.2 × slower Mistral DistServe style 0.123 3.0 × slower 

Llama3 AAFLOW+ 0.030 1.00 ×

Llama3 dense prefill 0.499 16.6 × slower Llama3 AAFLOW-text 0.509 17.0 × slower Llama3 vLLM local prefix 0.124 4.1 × slower Llama3 SGLang prefix 0.086 2.9 × slower Llama3 KVCOMM 0.187 6.2 × slower Llama3 DistServe style 0.052 1.7 × slower 

same prefix and pay a TTFT cost that scales with context length: 

𝑇𝑇 𝐹𝑇 text ∝ 𝐿. AAFLOW+ pays the prefill cost once and then re-sumes from the distributed state: 

𝑇𝑇 𝐹𝑇 state ≈ 𝑇 transfer + 𝑇 resume .

Table 2(HF+Mistral, Llama3) and Figure 7(HF+Mistral) reports the mean TTFT across all tested context lengths for each model. AAFLOW+ has the lowest mean TTFT for both models. On Mistral, dense text prefill, AAFLOW-text and vLLM-local, SGLang, share almost same cold-start TTFT because each must first materialize the prompt prefix locally, while AAFLOW+ has 0.041s, a 49 .2×

reduction. Local-prefix baselines reduce total repeated work after cache population, which is reflected in aggregate compute cost rather than cold TTFT. The nearest competitor by mean TTFT is DistServe-style at 0.123s, still 2.99 × slower than AAFLOW+. The largest contexts show the widening gap most clearly. The TTFT curves validate the expected asymptotic behavior. Dense and text baselines scale with context length because every agent or branch repeats prefix prefill. AAFLOW+ grows much more slowly because the marginal branch cost is the KV transfer/resume path. Mistral shows the strongest visible spread because the run reaches 32K context; DistServe-style is the nearest TTFT competitor because it also separates prefill from decode, but it does not expose the same explicit state abstraction and therefore remains slower in these state-transfer workloads. 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 Number of Agents 

> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12 Speedup (baseline / AAFLOW+)
> Speedup vs Number of Agents AAFLOW+ aa fl ow_text dense_pre fi ll distserve_style kvcomm_pre fi xsglang_pre fi xvllm_local_pre fi x

Figure 8: Experiment-2: Scaling impact of operator abstrac-tion for multi-agent jobs with HF+Mistral. Total latency and speedup versus the nearest competitor with HF backend. The scaling result is the clearest evidence that the KV state ab-straction matters for multi-agent workloads. Table 3: Experiment-2: Aggregate Compute Cost and Effi-ciency Gain (EG) vs nearest competitor in HF backend 

Model Agents AAFLOW+ Dense SGLang (s) EG to (s) (s) Competitor SGLang Mistral 1 30.700 169.757 119.135 3.88 ×

Mistral 2 30.700 339.514 224.850 7.32 ×

Mistral 4 58.371 679.027 436.281 7.47 ×

Mistral 8 113.714 1358.055 859.142 7.56 ×

Mistral 16 224.399 2716.109 1704.865 7.60 ×

Llama3 1 29.067 143.959 112.396 3.87 ×

Llama3 2 29.067 287.918 216.891 7.46 ×

Llama3 4 56.351 575.836 425.880 7.56 ×

Llama3 8 110.918 1151.671 843.858 7.61 ×

Llama3 16 220.052 2303.342 1679.815 7.63 ×

## 6.7 Experiment 2: Multi-Agent Scaling 

To evaluate multi-agent scaling, we extrapolate aggregate multi-agent compute time using an analytical cost model parameterized by empirical microbenchmarks gathered on our GPU cluster. In text-passing systems, each agent pays for repeated context processing, so cost increases approximately linearly with the agent count. In 

> 9

high-branch-factor workflows (e.g., 16 parallel branches), a single node can’t run all decodes without OOM errors, so the workload must be distributed across nodes, requiring KV network transfer. AAFLOW+ materializes the shared context once and then fork the state, which should improve the speedup as 𝑘 grows: 

𝑇 𝑘  

> state

≈ 𝑇 prefill + 𝑘 · 𝑇 decode ,

Table 3 and Figure 8 show aggregate compute cost by agent count. The scaling table shows two effects. First, AAFLOW+ uses the available stateful parallel width for the first two agents, so 1-agent and 2-agent costs are equal for both models. Second, after the parallel width is filled, costs grow by waves rather than by full repeated prefill. Mistral grows from 30.700s at 1–2 agents to 224.399s at 16 agents. Llama3 grows from 29.067s at 1–2 agents to 220.052s at 16 agents. The nearest non-AAFLOW+ competitor at every agent count is SGLang prefix, but it remains 3.87 ×–7.63 ×

slower because local prefix reuse does not remove workflow-level branch duplication. The dense baseline is much worse: at 16 agents, the dense to-tal aggregated compute cost is 2716.109 for Mistral. AAFLOW+ converts the agent dimension from repeated prefill into repeated decode continuation from an already materialized state. Even a strong local-prefix baseline cannot fully remove duplicated branch work once many agents need the same prefix. 0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 Context Length (tokens) 

> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5 Time (s)
> Transfer/Recompute Crossover by Baseline Policy AAFLOW+ transfer @ 100Gbps AAFLOW+ transfer @ 10Gbps AAFLOW+ transfer @ 200Gbps AAFLOW+ transfer @ 25Gbps AAFLOW+ transfer @ 400Gbps Dense/text recompute Local-pre fi x reuse (vLLM/SGLang/KVCOMM)

Figure 9: Experiment-3: RDMA-like transfer benefit sum-mary with HF backend and Mistral model. This experiment gives a concrete scheduling rule for stateful execution. The maximum transfer-vs-recompute speedup grows with band-width. 

## 6.8 Experiment 3: Transfer vs. Recomputation 

The third experiment compares KV transfer cost to recomputing the prompt prefill where 𝑇 recompute = 𝑇 prefill :

𝑇 transfer = KV bytes bandwidth + latency ,

The scheduler prefer state transfer when 𝑇 transfer < 𝑇 recompute .Figure 9 summarizes the RDMA-like latency sweep. On slow 10 Gbps links, the KV object can be large enough that recomputa-tion may be preferable for some contexts (5 out of 8). This is ex-pected: low bandwidth makes the serialized KV payload expensive. 

Table 4: Experiment-4: Mean peak KV memory and memory ratio with HF backend 

Model Baseline Peak KV Memory (GiB) Ratio Mistral AAFLOW+ 8.355 1.00 ×

Mistral dense prefill 49.987 5.98 × larger Mistral AAFLOW-text 53.986 6.46 × larger Mistral vLLM local prefix 14.351 1.72 × larger 

Mistral SGLang prefix 14.591 1.74 × larger Mistral KVCOMM 15.702 1.88 × larger Mistral DistServe style 50.995 6.10 × larger Llama3 AAFLOW+ 4.210 1.00 ×

Llama3 dense prefill 25.188 5.98 × larger Llama3 AAFLOW-text 27.202 6.46 × larger Llama3 vLLM local prefix 7.231 1.72 × larger 

Llama3 SGLang prefix 7.311 1.73 × larger Llama3 KVCOMM 7.912 1.88 × larger Llama3 DistServe style 25.695 6.10 × larger 

At 25 Gbps and above, transfer wins at every tested context for both models, measured HF prefill is already more expensive than transferring the measured KV bytes across every tested context. AAFLOW+, therefore, needs both the stateful operators and the cost model: KVTransfer is not always correct, but it is usually correct on high-bandwidth GPU clusters and can be selected explicitly by the scheduler. 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 Branch Factor 

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 120 Peak KV Memory (GiB)
> KV Memory Footprint vs Branch Factor AAFLOW+ aa fl ow_text dense_pre fi ll distserve_style kvcomm_pre fi xsglang_pre fi xvllm_local_pre fi x

Figure 10: Experiment-4: Mean peak KV memory with HF backend and Mistral Model. AAFLOW+ reduces memory be-cause it treats KV as a first-class object with lineage and ownership. 

## 6.9 Experiment 4: Memory Efficiency 

The fourth experiment compares peak KV memory footprint across baselines. The stateful design should avoid allocating redundant pre-fix KV for every branch. AAFLOW+ stores one materialized prefix 

> 10

plus branch continuation state; dense and text baselines effectively duplicate the prefix across branches. Table 4 and Figure 10 reports mean peak KV memory across branch factors 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16. For Mistral, AAFLOW+ averages 8.355 GiB peak KV memory. Dense, AAFLOW-text, and DistServe-style average 49.987 GiB, or 5.98 × the AAFLOW+ memory. vLLM-local and SGLang average 14.351 GiB (1.72 × AAFLOW+), and 14.591 GiB ( 1.74 × AAFLOW+), while KV-COMM averages 15.702 GiB ( 1.88 ×). The nearest competitor varies with the branch factor. At branch factors 1, 2, and 4, KVCOMM is closest to AAFLOW+. At branch factors 8 and 16, vLLM-local becomes closest. Even then, AAFLOW+ uses less memory at every branch factor. Forked states initially share block references, so memory grows with branch continuation rather than with full-context duplication. The vLLM-local and SGLang profiles also reduce duplicate prefix storage, but they are local-prefix baselines rather than distributed state-object schedulers. SKVCOMM captures communication-oriented prefix reuse but has a lower reuse fraction in this benchmark. The result is that AAFLOW+ has the lowest peak memory in every tested branch-factor setting. 

## 6.10 Experiment 5: Throughput and Framework Overhead 

The fifth experiment measures effective throughput and frame-work overhead Ω shown in Table 5. AAFLOW+ should improve throughput by removing repeated prefill work and reducing text serialization. In the benchmark schema, throughput is reported as generated tokens per second, and Ω captures framework-side scheduling, serialization, and orchestration overhead modeled by the baseline adapters. AAFLOW+ achieves approximately 302 to-kens/s on Mistral. The nearest throughput competitor is vLLM-local/SGLang/DistServe-style at about 38–39 tokens/s. The resulting throughput advantage is about 7.63 ×–8.04 × against those nearest competitors and roughly 9.47 × against dense text prefill, although dense text prefill has low overhead. The throughput numbers are consistent with the aggregated com-pute costs experiments. AAFLOW+ executes one measured prefill and then reuses state; text baselines repeatedly pay the full context construction and prefill cost. The explicit abstraction also keeps framework overhead small in this simulation profile. KVCOMM has a meaningful modeled communication overhead in these runs, which explains the larger Ω values and lower throughput relative to AAFLOW+. 

## 7 RELATED WORK 

Distributed Data Systems and Operator Abstractions: The de-sign of AAFLOW [ 34 ] and our extension builds upon a long line of work in distributed data systems, where computation is expressed as compositions of operators over structured data. Systems such as MapReduce [ 8], Spark [ 46 ], and Flink [ 5 ] demonstrate how declara-tive data transformations can be compiled into efficient distributed execution plans. More recent frameworks such as Modin [ 27 ] and Cylon [40] extend this paradigm to high-performance dataframes, emphasizing communication-aware execution and parallel process-ing patterns [ 25 , 26 , 36 ]. AAFLOW adapts these ideas to agentic 

Table 5: Experiment-5: Mean throughput and framework overhead with fixed context grid and variation agents. 

Model Baseline Throughput Ω (s) (tok/s) Mistral AAFLOW+ 302.61 0.0075 Mistral dense prefill 31.94 0.0019 

Mistral AAFLOW-text 31.84 11.1659 Mistral vLLM local prefix 38.81 0.0627 Mistral SGLang prefix 39.62 0.0657 Mistral KVCOMM 35.59 21.6770 Mistral DistServe style 37.62 0.0597 Llama3 AAFLOW+ 300.57 0.0075 Llama3 dense prefill 33.61 0.0019 

Llama3 AAFLOW-text 33.54 6.7272 Llama3 vLLM local prefix 38.46 0.0627 Llama3 SGLang prefix 39.27 0.0657 Llama3 KVCOMM 36.16 13.0375 Llama3 DistServe style 37.46 0.0597 

workflows by treating embedding, retrieval, reasoning, and mem-ory operations as composable operators. Our work further extends this abstraction by introducing stateful operators over KV cache, effectively generalizing dataflow systems into stateflow systems. 

Workflow Runtimes and Distributed Execution: A large body of work has explored distributed workflow execution and task scheduling. Systems such as Ray [ 24 ], Dask [ 30 ], and Parsl [ 4]provide flexible task-based execution frameworks for parallel and distributed workloads. HPC-oriented systems such as RADICAL-Pilot [ 23 , 31 – 33 ] and Pegasus [ 9] focus on large-scale scientific workflows. While these systems provide powerful execution sub-strates, they treat tasks as independent units and do not explicitly model LLM-specific state such as KV cache. As a result, they cannot exploit opportunities for state reuse across agents. Our work com-plements these systems by introducing an abstraction that exposes state dependencies and enables scheduling decisions based on both data and model state. 

LLM Programming and Agent Frameworks: Recent work on LLM programming has focused on improving the expressiveness and composability of language model applications. Frameworks such as LangChain [7], LangGraph [10], and AutoGen [41] enable multi-agent workflows, tool invocation, and iterative reasoning. DSPy [ 16 ] further proposes a declarative programming model for optimizing LLM pipelines. These systems treat orchestration as a high-level programming problem but largely ignore the underlying systems cost of data movement and state recomputation. In particu-lar, they rely on text-based communication between agents, leading to repeated prefill computation. Our work differs by introducing a systems-level abstraction that allows agents to exchange execution state directly. 

> 11

LLM Serving and KV-Cache Optimization: A growing body of work has focused on optimizing LLM inference through effi-cient KV-cache management. vLLM [ 19 ] introduces PagedAttention, which uses block-based memory allocation to improve throughput and reduce fragmentation. SGLang [ 47 ] proposes RadixAttention, enabling prefix sharing across structured programs. FlexGen [ 37 ]explores memory-compute trade-offs through offloading strategies, while DistServe [ 50 ] and LMCache [ 21 ] separate prefill and de-code stages to improve resource utilization. These systems demon-strate that KV cache is a critical performance factor in LLM serving. However, their optimizations are confined to single-node or single-request execution contexts with efficient storage, movement, and management of KV cache across heterogeneous memory tiers and serving backends. They do not expose KV cache as a distributed systems object that can be shared across multiple agents. Our work extends KV-cache optimization from local serving to distributed multi-agent workflows rather than focusing solely on cache man-agement. 

Distributed and Multi-Tenant LLM Serving: Recent work has explored scaling LLM serving across multiple tenants and dis-tributed environments. Systems such as Orca [ 45 ] and Sarathi [ 1]improve GPU utilization through scheduling and batching tech-niques. Helix [ 14 ] focuses on multi-tenant inference with efficient resource sharing. While these systems address throughput and fairness, they do not explicitly consider KV-state reuse across inde-pendent requests or agents. Our approach is orthogonal, focusing on reducing redundant computation by reusing state rather than improving scheduling alone. 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation and Memory Systems: 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems integrate external knowledge with LLM inference to improve factual accuracy [ 20 ]. Recent work has extended this paradigm with more sophisticated memory and retrieval mechanisms, such as MemoRAG [ 28 ], Hip-poRAG [ 13 ], and CueRAG [ 11 ]. These systems demonstrate the importance of persistent memory for multi-step reasoning. How-ever, most RAG systems treat memory as external data rather than internal model state. They optimize retrieval and indexing but do not address the cost of reprocessing retrieved context within the model. Our work complements these approaches by enabling the reuse of the internal KV representation of retrieved context. Existing research has focused on two areas: improving LLM effi-ciency via KV-cache optimization and enhancing workflow expres-siveness with agent frameworks. We unify these by treating the KV cache as a distributed state within an operator abstraction, enabling optimizations like cross-agent state reuse, distributed KV transfer, and state-aware scheduling. Extending AAFLOW’s operator-driven model with stateflow lays the groundwork for scalable, efficient, and reproducible multi-agent LLM systems. 

## 8 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

These results should be viewed within defined limits. The work-loads use synthetic, deterministic prompts [ 17 ], so answer quality is not evaluated against external datasets. The main output length is 𝑌 = 64 tokens; longer outputs would reduce prefill reuse ben-efits and place greater emphasis on decoding. AAFLOW+ targets shared-prefix multi-agent workflows, not independent stateless inference. Infrastructure assessments are based on controlled exper-iments rather than production cluster data. We define architectural objectives for eviction and memory-constrained scheduling, but currently evaluate only unconstrained memory. AAFLOW+ opens several directions for future research. First, extending the workflow to support heterogeneous model envi-ronments remains an important challenge. Current compatibility constraints assume identical model architectures and positional encodings, but real-world systems may involve mixtures of models, adapters, or fine-tuned variants. Generalizing state reuse across heterogeneous settings would broaden applicability. Second, cost-aware scheduling can be further developed. While this work demonstrates the tradeoff between KV transfer and recomputation, future systems could incorporate dynamic bandwidth estimation, workload prediction, and adaptive placement strategies to opti-mize execution decisions in real time. Third, integrating stateful execution with emerging model architectures is a promising direction. While this work focuses on transformer-based KV cache, alternative architectures such as state space models introduce dif-ferent notions of internal state. Extending the proposed abstraction to support these models could enable a unified treatment of execu-tion state beyond KV representations. Fourth, fault tolerance and persistence for stateful workflows require deeper investigation. Although recomputation provides a fallback mechanism, efficient checkpointing, partial state recovery, and durable storage of KV state remain open problems for large-scale deployments. Finally, future work can explore programming abstractions and devel-oper tooling for state-aware workflows. Providing higher-level interfaces, debugging tools, and visualization systems for stateflow execution would make these capabilities accessible to a broader class of applications. 

## 9 CONCLUSION 

We presented AAFLOW+ , a stateful extension of agentic workflow abstraction that makes KV cache a first-class distributed systems object in AI memory instead of just a local inference optimization. AAFLOW+ presents a stateflow abstraction that allows agents to di-rectly interchange and reuse execution state, in contrast to current multi-agent LLM systems that rely on text-based communication and frequently recalculate shared context. Our method exposes state reuse at the workflow level by defining operators for KV-state materialization, transfer, fork, restricted composition, and eviction, and assembling workflows into communication-aware graphs. The runtime externalizes KV cache using explicit metadata descrip-tors and zero-copy communication pathways, enabling efficient state reuse across distributed agents while preserving correctness through compatibility constraints. Experimental results on Mistral-7B and Llama-3-8B show that AAFLOW+ significantly improves efficiency, achieving up to 50.2 × reduction in TTFT, 7.63 × lower multi-agent latency at 16-agent scale, 1.72 ×–6.10 × reduction in peak KV memory, and over 7.74 × improvement in throughput. These findings show that duplicate computation and framework overhead in multi-agent LLM execution can be significantly re-duced by substituting explicit KV-state sharing for text forwarding in AI memory. 

> 12

## REFERENCES 

[1] Amey Agrawal, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun Kwatra, Bhargav S Gulavani, and Ramachandran Ramjee. 2023. Sarathi: Efficient llm inference by piggybacking decodes with chunked prefills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16369 

(2023). [2] Apache Arrow Project. 2025. Apache Arrow. Project website. https://arrow. apache.org/ Language-independent columnar memory format with zero-copy reads. [3] Apache Software Foundation. 2016. Apache Arrow: A cross-language develop-ment platform for in-memory data. https://arrow.apache.org [4] Yadu Babuji, Anna Woodard, Zhuozhao Li, Daniel S. Katz, Ben Clifford, Rohan Kumar, Lukasz Lacinski, Ryan Chard, Justin M. Wozniak, Ian Foster, Michael Wilde, and Kyle Chard. 2019. Parsl: Pervasive Parallel Programming in Python. In Proceedings of the 28th International Symposium on High-Performance Parallel and Distributed Computing (Phoenix, AZ, USA) (HPDC ’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 25–36. https://doi.org/10.1145/33 07681.3325400 [5] Paris Carbone, Asterios Katsifodimos, Stephan Ewen, Volker Markl, Seif Haridi, and Kostas Tzoumas. 2015. Apache flink: Stream and batch processing in a single engine. The Bulletin of the Technical Committee on Data Engineering 38, 4 (2015). https://asterios.katsifodimos.com/assets/publications/flink-deb.pdf [6] Lisandro Dalcin, Rodrigo Paz, and Mario Storti. 2005. MPI for Python. J. Parallel and Distrib. Comput. 65, 9 (1 Sept. 2005), 1108–1115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jp dc.2005.03.010 [7] Emily Davis. 2024. Building Custom AI Workflows Using LangChain Tools. 

ThinkTide Global Research Journal 5, 4 (2024), 54–62. https://thinktidejournal.c om/index.php/TGRJ/article/view/53/63 [8] Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat. 2008. MapReduce: simplified data processing on large clusters. Commun. ACM 51, 1 (Jan. 2008), 107–113. https://doi.org/10.1 145/1327452.1327492 [9] Ewa Deelman, Karan Vahi, Gideon Juve, Mats Rynge, Scott Callaghan, Philip J. Maechling, Rajiv Mayani, Weiwei Chen, Rafael Ferreira da Silva, Miron Livny, and Kent Wenger. 2015. Pegasus, a workflow management system for science automation. Future Generation Computer Systems 46 (2015), 17–35. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2014.10.008 [10] LangChain Developer. 2024. LangGraph: Stateful Multi-Agent Workflows . Techni-cal Report. LangChain Inc. https://blog.langchain.com/langgraph-multi-agent-workflows [11] Yuanshuang Fu, Dan Liu, Bonan Zhang, Zhuotong Jiang, Haibo Mei, and Jiajin Guan. 2025. Cue RAG: Dynamic multi-output cue memory under H framework for retrieval-augmented generation. Neurocomputing 639 (2025), 130235. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2025.130235 [12] Yingsheng Geng, Yuchong Gao, Weihong Wu, Guyue Liu, and Jiang Liu. 2026. RelayCaching: Accelerating LLM Collaboration via Decoding KV Cache Reuse. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.13289 (2026). [13] Bernal J Gutiérrez, Yiheng Shu, Yu Gu, Michihiro Yasunaga, and Yu Su. 2024. Hipporag: Neurobiologically inspired long-term memory for large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems 37 (2024), 59532– 59569. [14] Bodun Hu, Jiamin Li, Le Xu, Myungjin Lee, Akshay Jajoo, Geon-Woo Kim, Hong Xu, and Aditya Akella. 2024. Blockllm: Multi-tenant finer-grained serving for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18322 (2024). [15] Cunchen Hu, Heyang Huang, Junhao Hu, Jiang Xu, Xusheng Chen, Tao Xie, Chenxi Wang, Sa Wang, Yungang Bao, Ninghui Sun, and Yizhou Shan. 2024. Mem-Serve: Context Caching for Disaggregated LLM Serving with Elastic Memory Pool. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17565 (2024). https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.17565 [16] Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav San-thanam, Sri Vardhamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, Matei Zaharia, and Christopher Potts. 2023. DSPy: Com-piling Declarative Language Model Calls into Self-Improving Pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03714 (2023). https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.03714 [17] Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al . 2019. Natural questions: a benchmark for question answering research. 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 7 (2019), 453–466. [18] Woosuk Kwon et al . 2023. vLLM: Easy, Fast, and Cheap LLM Serving. https: //github.com/vllm-project/vllm [19] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (Koblenz, Germany) (SOSP ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 611–626. https://doi.org/10.1145/3600006.3613165 [20] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Proceedings of the 34th Inter-national Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (NIPS ’20) . Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, Article 793, 16 pages. https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.5555/3495724.3496517 [21] Yuhan Liu, Jiayi Yao, Yihua Cheng, Yuwei An, Xiaokun Chen, Shaoting Feng, et al .2025. LMCache: An Efficient KV Cache Layer for Enterprise-Scale LLM Inference. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09665 (2025). https://arxiv.org/pdf/2510.09665 [22] LLMS3. 2026. When AI Memory Became an Architecture: KV-Cache Persistence, MCP, and the Night S3 Got Its Memory Tier. Project website. https://llms3. com/blog/when-ai-memory-became-an-architecture-may-2026 KV-Cache Persistence, MCP, and the Night S3 Got Its Memory Tier. [23] A. Merzky, M. Turilli, M. Titov, A. Al-Saadi, and S. Jha. 2022. Design and Perfor-mance Characterization of RADICAL-Pilot on Leadership-Class Platforms. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and amp; Distributed Systems 33, 04 (apr 2022), 818–829. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPDS.2021.3105994 [24] Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Stephanie Wang, Alexey Tumanov, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, Melih Elibol, Zongheng Yang, William Paul, Michael I Jordan, et al . 2018. Ray: A distributed framework for emerging {AI } applications. In 

13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18) . 561–577. https://www.usenix.org/system/files/osdi18-moritz.pdf [25] Niranda Perera, Arup Kumar Sarker, Kaiying Shan, Alex Fetea, Supun Kambu-rugamuve, Thejaka Amila Kanewala, Chathura Widanage, Mills Staylor, Tianle Zhong, Vibhatha Abeykoon, Gregor von Laszewski, and Geoffrey Fox. 2024. Supercharging distributed computing environments for high-performance data engineering. Frontiers in High Performance Computing Volume 2 - 2024 (2024). https://doi.org/10.3389/fhpcp.2024.1384619 [26] Niranda Perera, Arup Kumar Sarker, Mills Staylor, Gregor von Laszewski, Kaiy-ing Shan, Supun Kamburugamuve, Chathura Widanage, Vibhatha Abeykoon, Thejaka Amila Kanewela, and Geoffrey Fox. 2023. In-depth analysis on parallel processing patterns for high-performance Dataframes. Future Generation Com-puter Systems 149 (2023), 250–264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2023.07.007 [27] Maximilian Petersohn, Stephen Macke, Doris Xin, William Ma, J. K. Wittenauer, Stephen Hoyer, Ryan Marcus, Matei Zaharia, and Benjamin Recht. 2020. Towards Scalable Dataframe Systems. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment (PVLDB) 13, 12 (2020), 2033–2046. https://doi.org/10.14778/3407790.3407807 [28] Hongjin Qian, Zheng Liu, Peitian Zhang, Kelong Mao, Defu Lian, Zhicheng Dou, and Tiejun Huang. 2025. MemoRAG: Boosting Long Context Processing with Global Memory-Enhanced Retrieval Augmentation. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025 (Sydney NSW, Australia) (WWW ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2366–2377. https://doi.org/10.114 5/3696410.3714805 [29] Ruoyu Qin, Zheming Li, Weiran He, Jialei Cui, Heyi Tang, Feng Ren, Teng Ma, Shangming Cai, Yineng Zhang, Mingxing Zhang, Yongwei Wu, Weimin Zheng, and Xinran Xu. 2025. Mooncake: A KVCache-centric Disaggregated Architecture for LLM Serving. ACM Trans. Storage (Nov. 2025). https://doi.org/10.1145/3773 772 Just Accepted. [30] Matthew Rocklin. 2015. Dask: Parallel computation with blocked algorithms and task scheduling. In Proceedings of the 14th python in science conference , Vol. 130. Citeseer, 136. https://proceedings.scipy.org/articles/Majora-7b98e3ed-013.pdf [31] Arup Kumar Sarker, Aymen Alsaadi, Alexander James Halpern, Prabhath Tan-gella, Mikhail Titov, Niranda Perera, Mills Staylor, Gregor von Laszewski, Shantenu Jha, and Geoffrey Fox. 2025. Deep RC: A Scalable Data Engineering and Deep Learning Pipeline. In Job Scheduling Strategies for Parallel Process-ing: 28th International Workshop, JSSPP 2025, Milan, Italy, June 3–4, 2025, Re-vised Selected Papers (Milan, Italy). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 205–223. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-032-10507-3_11 [32] Arup Kumar Sarker, Aymen Alsaadi, Niranda Perera, Mills Staylor, Gregor von Laszewski, Matteo Turilli, Ozgur Ozan Kilic, Mikhail Titov, Andre Merzky, Shantenu Jha, et al . 2024. Design and implementation of an analysis pipeline for heterogeneous data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.15721 (2024). [33] Arup Kumar Sarker, Aymen Alsaadi, Niranda Perera, Mills Staylor, Gregor von Laszewski, Matteo Turilli, Ozgur Ozan Kilic, Mikhail Titov, Andre Merzky, Shantenu Jha, et al . 2024. Radical-Cylon: A Heterogeneous Data Pipeline for Scientific Computing. In Job Scheduling Strategies for Parallel Processing . Springer Nature Switzerland, 84–102. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-74430-3_5 [34] Arup Kumar Sarker, Mills Staylor, Aymen Alsaadi, Gregor von Laszewski, Shantenu Jha, and Geoffrey Fox. 2026. AAFLOW: Scalable Patterns for Agentic AI Workflows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.02162 (2026). Under Submission to SC2026. [35] Pavel Shamis, Manjunath Gorentla Venkata, M. Graham Lopez, Matthew B. Baker, Oscar Hernandez, Yossi Itigin, Mike Dubman, Gilad Shainer, Richard L. Graham, Liran Liss, Yiftah Shahar, Sreeram Potluri, Davide Rossetti, Donald Becker, Duncan Poole, Christopher Lamb, Sameer Kumar, Craig Stunkel, George Bosilca, and Aurelien Bouteiller. 2015. UCX: An Open Source Framework for HPC Network APIs and Beyond. In 2015 IEEE 23rd Annual Symposium on High-Performance Interconnects . 40–43. https://doi.org/10.1109/HOTI.2015.13 

> 13

[36] Kaiying Shan, Niranda Perera, Damitha Lenadora, Tianle Zhong, Arup Ku-mar Sarker, Supun Kamburugamuve, Thejaka Amila Kanewela, Chathura Widan-age, and Geoffrey Fox. 2022. Hybrid Cloud and HPC Approach to High-Performance Dataframes. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) . 2728–2736. https://doi.org/10.1109/BigData55660.2022.10020958 [37] Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Binhang Yuan, Zhuohan Li, Max Ryabinin, Beidi Chen, Percy Liang, Christopher Re, Ion Stoica, and Ce Zhang. 2023. FlexGen: High-Throughput Generative Inference of Large Language Models with a Single GPU. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research) , Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (Eds.), Vol. 202. PMLR, 31094–31116. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/sheng23a.html [38] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Reflexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Process-ing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (NIPS ’23) . Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, Article 377, 19 pages. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3666122.3666499 [39] Mills Staylor, Arup Kumar Sarker, Gregor von Laszewski, Geoffrey Fox, Yue Cheng, and Judy Fox. 2026. Combining Serverless and High-Performance Com-puting Paradigms to support ML Data-Intensive Applications. Frontiers in High Performance Computing (2026). [40] Chathura Widanage, Niranda Perera, Vibhatha Abeykoon, Supun Kamburuga-muve, Thejaka Amila Kanewala, Hasara Maithree, Pulasthi Wickramasinghe, Ahmet Uyar, Gurhan Gunduz, and Geoffrey Fox. 2020. High performance data engineering everywhere. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Smart Data Services (SMDS) . IEEE, 122–132. https://doi.org/10.1109/SMDS49396.2020.00022 [41] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang (Eric) Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Ahmed Awadallah, Ryen W. White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. 2024. AutoGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM Applications via Multi-Agent Conversation. In COLM 2024 . https://www.mi crosof t.com/en-us/research/publication/autogen-enabling-next-gen-llm-applications-via-multi-agent-conversation-framework/ [42] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . https: //openreview.net/pdf?id=WE_vluYUL-X [43] Hancheng Ye, Zhengqi Gao, Mingyuan Ma, Qinsi Wang, Yuzhe Fu, Ming-Yu Chung, Yueqian Lin, Zhijian Liu, Jianyi Zhang, Danyang Zhuo, and Yiran Chen. 2025. KVCOMM: Online Cross-context KV-cache Communication for Efficient LLM-based Multi-agent Systems. [44] Lu Ye, Ze Tao, Yong Huang, and Yang Li. 2024. ChunkAttention: Efficient Self-Attention with Prefix-Aware KV Cache and Two-Phase Partition. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .11608–11620. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.623 [45] Gyeong-In Yu, Joo Seong Jeong, Geon-Woo Kim, Soojeong Kim, and Byung-Gon Chun. 2022. Orca: A distributed serving system for {Transformer-Based }

generative models. In 16th USENIX symposium on operating systems design and implementation (OSDI 22) . 521–538. [46] Matei Zaharia, Reynold S. Xin, Patrick Wendell, Tathagata Das, Michael Armbrust, Ankur Dave, Xiangrui Meng, Josh Rosen, Shivaram Venkataraman, Michael J. Franklin, Ali Ghodsi, Joseph Gonzalez, Scott Shenker, and Ion Stoica. 2016. Apache Spark: a unified engine for big data processing. Commun. ACM 59, 11 (Oct. 2016), 56–65. https://doi.org/10.1145/2934664 [47] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. 2024. SGLang: efficient execution of struc-tured language model programs. In Proceedings of the 38th International Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) 

(NIPS ’24) . Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, Article 2000, 27 pages. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3737916.3739916 [48] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. 2024. SGLang: efficient execution of struc-tured language model programs. In Proceedings of the 38th International Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) 

(NIPS ’24) . Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, Article 2000, 27 pages. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3737916.3739916 [49] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xuanzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang. 2024. DistServe: Disaggregating Prefill and Decoding for Goodput-Optimized Large Language Model Serving. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI) . https://www.usenix.o rg/conference/osdi24/presentation/zhong-yinmin [50] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xuanzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang. 2024. {DistServe }: Disaggregating prefill and decoding for goodput-optimized large language model serving. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24) . 193–210. 

## APPENDIX A EXTENDED SYSTEM DESIGN 

This appendix expands the design and implementation details of AAFLOW+. The main paper presents the operator abstraction, state object, scheduler, and evaluation results. Here, we describe how the compiler, KV-state manager, transport layer, runtime, and backend adapters interact during execution. 

## A.1 Design Components 

AAFLOW+ is organized around five cooperating components: the stateful compiler, the KV-state manager, the transport subsystem, the state-aware scheduler, and the execution runtime. The stateful compiler converts an agentic workflow into a graph containing both data edges and state edges. The KV-state manager tracks block-level KV metadata, ownership, lineage, and placement. The transport subsystem moves KV blocks across devices and nodes using Ar-row metadata and UCX/RDMA-style communication. The sched-uler decides whether to transfer, reuse, fork, evict, or recompute state. Finally, the execution runtime coordinates backend invoca-tion through Hugging Face, vLLM, or SGLang-compatible execution paths. Given a workflow 𝑊 , the compiler constructs a stateful execution graph 

𝐺 𝑠 = (𝑉 , 𝐸 𝑑 , 𝐸 𝑠 ),

where 𝑉 is the set of operator instances, 𝐸 𝑑 represents ordinary data dependencies, and 𝐸 𝑠 represents KV-state dependencies. Each vertex is annotated as 

𝑣 𝑖 = (𝑂𝑝 𝑠 𝑖 , 𝑅 𝑖 , 𝐿 𝑖 , 𝐶 𝑖 ),

where 𝑂𝑝 𝑠 𝑖 is the stateful operator, 𝑅 𝑖 describes resource require-ments, 𝐿 𝑖 captures locality constraints derived from KV-state place-ment, and 𝐶 𝑖 stores compatibility constraints such as model identity, tokenizer configuration, attention layout, and positional encoding. The compiler inserts KV-state operators when it detects shared prompt prefixes or branchable contexts. For example, a text-centric workflow 

𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 → { 𝐴𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 1, . . . , 𝐴𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑘 }

is rewritten as 

𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒 (𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 ) → 𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑘 (𝑆 𝐾𝑉 , 𝑘 )→ { 𝐴𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 1 (𝑆 (1) 

> 𝐾𝑉

), . . . , 𝐴𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑘 (𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐾𝑉

)} . (41) This transformation makes prefix reuse explicit and allows the runtime to schedule reasoning branches without forcing each branch to replay the same context. 

## A.2 KV-State Metadata Catalog 

AAFLOW+ maintains a metadata catalog for every materialized KV state. The catalog separates logical state identity from physical tensor placement. This allows the scheduler to reason about state reuse without scanning device memory or reconstructing prompt text. Each KV state is represented as 

𝑆 𝐾𝑉 = (𝑀, Θ, 𝐵, Π, Λ, Γ),

> 14

where 𝑀 is the model identifier, Θ is the model and tokenizer con-figuration, 𝐵 is the set of KV blocks, Π stores positional metadata, Λ

records lineage, and Γ records placement and ownership. Internally, the KV-state manager maintains the mapping 

M : (𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 _𝑖𝑑, 𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 _𝑖𝑑 ) → ( 𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒, 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒, 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠, 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒, 𝑜𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑟 ).

Table 6: Metadata maintained by the AAFLOW+ KV-state manager. 

Field Purpose 

state_id Unique logical identifier for a KV state. 

model_id Model family and checkpoint used to create the state. 

tokenizer_id Tokenizer and vocabulary compatibility. 

position_range Token positions by each KV block. 

layer_id Transformer layer with the KV block. 

block_id Block identifier for partial transfer and reuse. 

lineage Materialize, fork, transfer, merge, or evict history. 

device GPU, CPU, or remote memory location. 

owner Runtime worker currently responsible for the block. 

refcount Number of logical states sharing the block. 

last_access Timestamp or logical clock for eviction. This design allows multiple forked states to share the same phys-ical prefix blocks. When a branch diverges, the runtime applies copy-on-write behavior: shared prefix blocks remain aliased, while branch-specific continuation blocks are allocated separately. 

## B USE CASE: COLLABORATIVE RAG WITH SHARED EVIDENCE 

A representative use case is collaborative retrieval-augmented gen-eration over a long document collection. Suppose a user asks a complex scientific question requiring retrieval, risk analysis, veri-fication, and final synthesis. A conventional multi-agent pipeline may use four agents: a retriever, a reasoning agent, a verifier, and a summarizer. All agents require the same retrieved evidence prefix, but they perform different downstream tasks. In a text-centric implementation, the retriever emits passages as text. Each downstream agent then receives the same passages and performs a separate prefill over the identical context: 

𝑇 𝑘  

> text

≈ 𝑘 · 𝑇 prefill (𝐿 ) + 

> 𝑘

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑇 decode (𝑌 𝑗 ) + Ωtext .

This duplicates both compute and KV memory. With AAFLOW+, the retrieved evidence is materialized once as KV state: 

𝑆 𝐾𝑉 = 𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒 (𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡, 𝑀 ).

The runtime then forks this state: 

{𝑆 (1) 

> 𝐾𝑉

, . . . , 𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐾𝑉

} = 𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑘 (𝑆 𝐾𝑉 , 𝑘 ),

and assigns the forked states to the reasoning, verification, and synthesis agents. Each agent resumes from the shared context state and only pays the cost of branch-specific continuation: 

𝑇 𝑘  

> state

≈ 𝑇 prefill (𝐿 ) + 𝑇 fork (𝑆 𝐾𝑉 , 𝑘 ) + 

> 𝑘

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑇 decode (𝑌 𝑗 ) + Ωstate .

The benefit is largest when the retrieved context is long, the number of agents is large, and the branch outputs are short relative to the shared prefix. 

## C END-TO-END EXECUTION 

This section describes the full AAFLOW+ call flow for a shared-prefix multi-agent workflow. 

Workflow Submission: The user submits a workflow contain-ing a shared context and multiple downstream agents: 

𝑊 = (𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡, {𝐴𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 1, . . . , 𝐴𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑘 }, 𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑦 ).

The policy specifies whether state reuse is allowed, whether branches can share physical blocks, and whether transfer or recomputation should be preferred under memory pressure. 

Compilation: The compiler parses the workflow and constructs the stateful graph: 

𝐺 𝑠 = (𝑉 , 𝐸 𝑑 , 𝐸 𝑠 ).

It identifies common prefixes, inserts 𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒 before the first shared reasoning stage, inserts 𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑘 before branch ex-pansion, and annotates each branch with state compatibility con-straints. 

State Materialization: The runtime sends the shared context to the backend model and executes the prefill stage once. The back-end produces KV tensors, which are registered with the KV-state manager: 

𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 

−−−−−→ 𝑆 𝐾𝑉 .

The KV-state manager records block identifiers, token ranges, layer identifiers, placement, and lineage. 

Scheduling and Placement: The scheduler chooses placement for each branch. For a branch assigned to the same node as the materialized KV state, the scheduler prefers aliasing or local reuse. For a branch assigned to a remote node, it compares transfer cost against recomputation: 

𝜋 (𝑆 ) =

(

𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 𝑓 𝑒𝑟, 𝑇 transfer (𝑆 ) < 𝑇 prefill (𝐿 ),𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑒, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒. 

Execution: Agents resume from the assigned KV state and gen-erate branch-specific continuations. The runtime updates the state graph as new continuation blocks are created: 

𝑆 ( 𝑗 ) 

> 𝐾𝑉

→ 𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑗 (𝑌 𝑗 ) → 𝑂𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡 𝑗 .

Merge and Finalization: The outputs are merged using a safe reduction policy. AAFLOW+ does not arbitrarily blend divergent attention states. Instead, it supports restricted merge patterns such as non-overlapping sequential concatenation, prefix-compatible extension, or text-level reduction through a summarizing model invocation. 

> 15

## D ALGORITHMS FOR KV OPERATORS 

Each KV state follows a finite-state lifecycle: 

𝐶𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 → 𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑 → 𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 → 𝐹𝑜𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑑 

→ 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 𝑓 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑑 → 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑑 → 𝐸𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑. (42) The lifecycle is maintained by the KV-state manager and up-dated after every operator invocation, shown in Table-7. Because lineage is explicit, the scheduler can distinguish original material-ized prefixes, forked aliases, transferred blocks, and branch-specific continuation state. 

## D.1 KV Materialization 

KV materialization converts a text context into reusable execution state. This operation is invoked once for a shared prefix. 

Algorithm 1 KV-Materialize 

Require: Context tokens 𝑥 , model 𝑀 , tokenizer/configuration Θ

Ensure: KV state 𝑆 𝐾𝑉  

> 1:

Validate model and tokenizer configuration.  

> 2:

Execute backend prefill on 𝑥 using 𝑀 . 

> 3:

Collect layer-wise KV tensors {( 𝐾 ℓ , 𝑉 ℓ )} . 

> 4:

Partition tensors into KV blocks 𝐵 = {𝑏 1, . . . , 𝑏 𝑚 }. 

> 5:

Create metadata (𝑀, Θ, Π, Λ, Γ). 

> 6:

Register (𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 _𝑖𝑑, 𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 _𝑖𝑑 ) → ( 𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒, 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒, 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 ) in the KV-state manager.  

> 7:

Return 𝑆 𝐾𝑉 = (𝑀, Θ, 𝐵, Π, Λ, Γ).Materialization is the only operation that pays the full prefill cost for the shared prefix. All downstream reuse is expressed as fork, transfer, alias, or resume. 

## D.2 KV Fork 

KV fork creates multiple logical descendants from a shared prefix state. 

Algorithm 2 KV-Fork 

Require: Parent state 𝑆 𝐾𝑉 , number of branches 𝑘 

Ensure: Forked states {𝑆 (1) 

> 𝐾𝑉

, . . . , 𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐾𝑉

} 

> 1:

Check that 𝑆 𝐾𝑉 is valid and not evicted.  

> 2:

for 𝑗 = 1 to 𝑘 do  

> 3:

Create child metadata with lineage Λ( 𝑗 ) = Λ ∪ { 𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑘 ( 𝑗 )} . 

> 4:

Alias parent prefix blocks by increasing block reference counts.  

> 5:

Assign branch-specific ownership and placement policy.  

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

Return 𝑘 logical child states. Fork does not copy the entire KV tensor by default. It creates logical children that share prefix blocks until branch-specific con-tinuation requires new allocation. 

Algorithm 3 KV-Transfer 

Require: State 𝑆 𝐾𝑉 , source node 𝑛 𝑎 , destination node 𝑛 𝑏 

Ensure: Destination state 𝑆 ′ 

> 𝐾𝑉
> 1:

Estimate transfer cost 𝑇 transfer = |𝐾𝑉 |/ 𝐵𝑊 + 𝛿 . 

> 2:

Estimate recomputation cost 𝑇 prefill (𝐿 ). 

> 3:

if 𝑇 transfer ≥ 𝑇 prefill (𝐿 ) then  

> 4:

Return RecomputeDecision . 

> 5:

end if  

> 6:

Select required KV blocks based on downstream position range.  

> 7:

Send Arrow metadata descriptor to 𝑛 𝑏 . 

> 8:

Transfer KV tensor buffers using UCX/RDMA/MPI transport.  

> 9:

Register received blocks in the destination KV-state manager.  

> 10:

Update placement metadata Γ and lineage Λ. 

> 11:

Return transferred state 𝑆 ′ 

> 𝐾𝑉

.

## D.3 KV Transfer 

KV transfer moves or aliases KV blocks between workers. The scheduler invokes transfer only when it is cheaper than recompu-tation. The operation works at block granularity, allowing the runtime to transfer only the prefix segments needed by the downstream branch. 

## D.4 KV Resume 

KV resume injects precomputed state into a backend invocation and skips repeated prefill. 

Algorithm 4 KV-Resume 

Require: State 𝑆 𝐾𝑉 , branch prompt suffix 𝑞 , model backend 𝐵 

Ensure: Generated output 𝑦  

> 1:

Validate compatibility of 𝑆 𝐾𝑉 with backend model and tok-enizer.  

> 2:

Load or map KV blocks into the backend-visible memory do-main.  

> 3:

Initialize decoding position from Π. 

> 4:

Append branch-specific suffix tokens 𝑞 if required.  

> 5:

Decode output tokens using reused KV state.  

> 6:

Register any newly generated continuation KV blocks.  

> 7:

Return generated output 𝑦 .Resume is the operation that converts state reuse into TTFT reduction. Instead of rebuilding the shared prefix, the backend continues from the imported or mapped KV state. 

## D.5 Restricted KV Merge 

Restricted merge reconciles branch outputs without unsafe tensor-level blending of divergent KV states. This conservative merge rule is necessary because KV state is position-dependent and model-layout-dependent. AAFLOW+ there-fore treats merge as a controlled operator rather than as arbitrary tensor composition. 

> 16

Table 7: AAFLOW+ KV-state lifecycle transitions. 

Transition Trigger Runtime Action Created → Registered Backend prefill completes Insert metadata into catalog. Registered → Active Scheduler assigns owner Pin or map blocks to worker. Active → Forked Branch expansion Create child state descriptors. Forked → Transferred Remote branch placement Transfer required blocks. Transferred → Resumed Agent execution begins Inject state into backend. Resumed → Active Decode creates continuation Register new branch blocks. Active → Evicted Memory pressure Free low-priority blocks. 

Algorithm 5 Restricted-KV-Merge 

Require: States or outputs {𝑆 1, . . . , 𝑆 𝑘 }, merge policy 𝜇 

Ensure: Merged state or merged text output  

> 1:

Check model compatibility and positional compatibility.  

> 2:

if 𝜇 permits prefix-compatible concatenation then  

> 3:

Concatenate non-overlapping compatible state segments.  

> 4:

else if 𝜇 requires semantic reduction then  

> 5:

Convert branch outputs to text and call a summarizing/re-duction operator.  

> 6:

else  

> 7:

Reject tensor-level merge and fall back to text-level reduc-tion.  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

Record merge lineage in Λ. 

> 10:

Return merged result. 

## D.6 KV Eviction 

KV eviction releases state when memory pressure exceeds the configured threshold. 

Algorithm 6 KV-Evict 

Require: KV-state catalog C, memory budget 𝐵 max 

Ensure: Updated catalog and freed memory  

> 1:

Compute priority score for each state: 

𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 (𝑆 ) = 𝛼 · 𝑟𝑒𝑢𝑠𝑒 (𝑆 ) − 𝛽 · 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 (𝑆 ) − 𝛾 · 𝑎𝑔𝑒 (𝑆 ). 

> 2:

while allocated memory > 𝐵 max do  

> 3:

Select state 𝑆 ∗ with lowest score.  

> 4:

if 𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 (𝑆 ∗) = 0 then  

> 5:

Free local tensor blocks and update catalog.  

> 6:

else  

> 7:

Decrement aliases or evict only unshared continuation blocks.  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

end while  

> 10:

Return updated catalog. Eviction is aware of forked state. Shared prefix blocks are re-tained when multiple branches still reference them, while low-value continuation blocks can be released earlier. 

## E EXAMPLE: PLANNER–RETRIEVER–SOLVER CALL FLOW 

This section illustrates a complete AAFLOW+ execution path for a planner–retriever–solver workflow. 

Step 1 - Planning: The planner decomposes a user request into subquestions and determines that the downstream agents require a shared evidence context. 

𝑈 𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑄𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 → 𝑂𝑝 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛 → { 𝑆𝑢𝑏𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘 1, . . . , 𝑆𝑢𝑏𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘 𝑘 }.

Step 2 - Retrieval and Context Assembly: The retriever fetches documents and constructs a shared context: 

𝑆𝑢𝑏𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑠 → 𝑂𝑝 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑣𝑒 → 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 . 

Step 3 - KV Materialization : The context is prefilling once: 

𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 → 𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒 → 𝑆 𝐾𝑉 .

Step 4 - Fork Across Solvers: The state is forked across multiple solver agents: 

𝑆 𝐾𝑉 → 𝑂𝑝 𝑘𝑣 _𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑘 (𝑘 ) → { 𝑆 (1) 

> 𝐾𝑉

, . . . , 𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐾𝑉

}.

Step 5 - Transfer or Local Reuse: For each solver branch, the scheduler chooses local reuse, transfer, or recomputation: 

𝜋 (𝑆 ) =



𝑟𝑒𝑢𝑠𝑒, 𝑆 is local and compatible ,𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 𝑓 𝑒𝑟, 𝑇 transfer < 𝑇 prefill ,𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑒, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒. 

Step 6 - Solver Execution: Each solver resumes from the shared KV state and generates a branch-specific answer: 

𝐴𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑗 (𝑆 ( 𝑗 ) 

> 𝐾𝑉

) → 𝐴𝑛𝑠𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑗 .

Step 7 — Safe Merge: The final synthesis stage merges branch out-puts through a text-level reduction or prefix-compatible restricted composition: 

{𝐴𝑛𝑠𝑤𝑒𝑟 1, . . . , 𝐴𝑛𝑠𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑘 } → 𝑂𝑝 𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒 → 𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙𝐴𝑛𝑠𝑤𝑒𝑟 . 

This call flow shows why AAFLOW+ is most effective for shared-prefix multi-agent workloads. The expensive evidence context is materialized once, while each branch pays only transfer/resume and continuation costs. 

> 17

## F EVALUATION DETAILS 

We utilize a trace-driven model parameterized by hardware mi-crobenchmarks to rigorously isolate the fundamental systems-level KV-transfer limits from the inherently high variance of Python-based agentic frameworks. We show full experimental results with the Hugging Face (HF) backend and the Mistral model in Section 6 (Evaluation) of this paper. In the appendix section, we will cover all experiments with HF, vLLM, and SGLang backends with the Llama3 model and vLLM, and SGLang backends with the Mistral model. All source code and experimental results are committed to the following repository: https://github.com/arupcsedu/AAFLO W, and all environmental setup and dependencies are written on 

stateful_agentic_algebra/Readme.md file. 

## F.1 Experiment 1 extension: TTFT Reduction 

The first experiment measures time to first token (TTFT) as context length increases. Text-passing systems repeatedly rebuild the same prefix and therefore pay a TTFT cost that scales with context length: 

𝑇𝑇 𝐹𝑇 text ∝ 𝐿. 

AAFLOW+ pays the prefill cost once and then resumes from the distributed state: 

𝑇𝑇 𝐹𝑇 state ≈ 𝑇 transfer + 𝑇 resume .

Across all three backends shown in Table 8, AAFLOW+ achieves the lowest workflow-level TTFT because it replaces repeated prompt replay with explicit state resume. On the HF backend, the clearest gap appears on Mistral: AAFLOW+ reaches 0.041 s mean TTFT, compared with 2.057 s for AAFLOW-text, 2.017 s for dense pre-fill, and 0.704 s for KVCOMM. Even the strongest non-AAFLOW+ workflow baseline, DistServe style, remains at 0.123 s, still 3.0 ×

slower. On Llama3, the same ordering holds: AAFLOW+ reaches 0.030 s, while DistServe style is 0.052 s and SGLang prefix is 0.086 s. The largest-context results show the same effect more sharply. On vLLM at maximum context, Mistral AAFLOW+ is 0.171 s, whereas dense prefill is 38.880 s, AAFLOW-text is 39.655 s, KVCOMM is 13.315 s, and DistServe style is 0.316 s. On SGLang at maximum context, Mistral AAFLOW+ is 0.876 s, while dense prefill is 13.317 s, AAFLOW-text is 13.566 s, KVCOMM is 5.089 s, and DistServe style is 1.021 s. The reason is consistent across backends. Dense prefill and AAFLOW-text always reconstruct the prompt prefix, so their TTFT grows with context length. Local-prefix baselines such as vLLM-prefix and SGLang-prefix improve over dense replay, but their reuse is confined to one serving engine and does not expose explicit trans-fer, placement, or branch lineage across workflow agents. KVCOMM communicates KV-like state, but in these experiments it pays more modeled communication overhead and achieves lower effective reuse than AAFLOW+. DistServe style remains the closest competi-tor because it also separates prefill from decode, but it still lacks the explicit fork/transfer/restricted-merge workflow abstraction of AAFLOW+, so it cannot fully eliminate branch-level prefix replay. 

## F.2 Experiment 2: Multi-Agent Scaling 

The goal is to evaluate how total latency changes as the number of agents increases. Text-centric systems repeat prefill and context construction for each agent. AAFLOW+ should amortize the shared prefix and scale mainly with branch continuation work. The imple-mentation uses a finite parallel-wave model, so small agent counts can fit into one stateful wave while larger agent counts require additional waves. The multi-agent scaling results show (Table 9) that AAFLOW+ changes how latency grows with agent count. On the HF back-end, the strongest comparison appears at 16 agents: for Mistral, AAFLOW+ reaches 224.39 s, while the nearest non-AAFLOW+ com-petitor, SGLang prefix, is 1704.86 s, giving a 7.60 × speedup; dense prefill is even worse at 2716.11 s. For Llama3 at 16 agents, AAFLOW+ reaches 220.05 s, while SGLang prefix is 1679.81 s, again a 7.63 × gap. The same trend holds on the live serving backends. On vLLM at 16 agents, Mistral AAFLOW+ is 465.45 s versus 3532.56 s for SGLang prefix; on SGLang, Mistral AAFLOW+ is 701.29 s versus 5363.03 s for SGLang prefix. Llama3 follows the same pattern, reaching 253.53 s versus 1926.11 s on vLLM and 329.07 s versus 2514.49 s on SGLang. AAFLOW+ outperforms other methods by materializing the shared prefix once and forking reusable state, causing memory growth in execution waves as parallel capacity is reached, rather than through repeated full-prefill operations. In contrast, non-AAFLOW+ baselines like dense prefill and AAFLOW-text allocate a complete prefill for each agent, while vLLM-prefix and SGLang-prefix offer only local prefix reuse within the engine. Although local reuse reduces some duplication, it does not eliminate workflow-level branch duplication when multiple agents share a prefix, lead-ing to a growing scaling gap as agent count increases. 

## F.3 Experiment 3: Transfer vs. Recomputation 

The goal is to evaluate the scheduler decision: 

𝑇 transfer = KV bytes bandwidth + latency , 𝑇 recompute = 𝑇 prefill .

Experiment 3 (Table 10) shows that AAFLOW+ needs both ex-plicit state operators and a cost model. The strongest concrete result comes from the HF sweep: at 10 Gbps, transfer is beneficial for only 5 of 8 tested Mistral contexts, but at 25 Gbps and above it is benefi-cial for all tested contexts. The maximum transfer-over-recompute speedup rises from 2.86 × at 10 Gbps to 7.14 × at 25 Gbps and up to 113.88 × at 400 Gbps. This gives a clear scheduling rule: transfer is not always profitable on slow links, but it becomes decisively better on RDMA-class GPU-cluster networks. The baseline systems are structurally limited: dense and text-passing approaches cannot choose between transfer and recompute since KV state is not a transferable object. Local-prefix systems only reuse cache within a server, lacking general policies for cross-agent or cross-node transfer. As shown in Table 10, both vLLM and SGLang manage KV internally but do not support stable public KV export/import in this evaluation. In contrast, AAFLOW+ en-ables state transfer as a core workflow operation, selecting transfer only when it is more bandwidth-efficient than prompt replay, thus achieving superior performance. 

## F.4 Experiment 4: Memory Efficiency 

The goal is to compare peak KV memory as branch factor grows. A stateful workflow should avoid duplicating the full shared prefix for every branch. 

> 18

Table 8: Experiment 1: Mean TTFT by baseline with HF, vLLM, and SGLang backends and 1024 - 32768 context size. 

HF Backend vLLM Backend SGLang Backend Model Baseline Mean Speedup Mean Speedup Mean Speedup TTFT(s) (slower) TTFT(s) (slower) TTFT(s) (slower) Mistral AAFLOW+ 0.041 1.00 × 0.116 1.00 × 0.629 1.00 ×

Mistral dense prefill 2.017 49.2 × 20.026 172.6 × 7.396 11.8 ×

Mistral AAFLOW-text 2.057 50.2 × 20.425 176.1 × 7.531 12.0 ×

Mistral vLLM local prefix 0.437 10.7 × 4.211 36.3 × 2.013 3.2 ×

Mistral SGLang prefix 0.280 6.8 × 2.629 22.7 × 1.475 2.3 ×

Mistral KVCOMM 0.704 17.2 × 6.876 59.3 × 2.920 4.6 ×

Mistral DistServe style 0.123 3.0 × 0.197 1.7 × 0.710 1.1 ×

Mistral live vLLM serve n/a n/a 19.925 171.8 × n/a n/a Mistral live SGLang serve n/a n/a n/a n/a 6.781 10.8 ×

Llama3 AAFLOW+ 0.030 1.00 × 0.061 1.00 × 0.139 1.00 ×

Llama3 dense prefill 0.499 16.6 × 3.958 64.9 × 1.810 13.0 ×

Llama3 AAFLOW-text 0.509 17.0 × 4.036 66.2 × 1.843 13.3 ×

Llama3 vLLM local prefix 0.124 4.1 × 0.862 14.1 × 0.481 3.5 ×

Llama3 SGLang prefix 0.086 2.9 × 0.552 9.0 × 0.348 2.5 ×

Llama3 KVCOMM 0.187 6.2 × 1.383 22.7 × 0.704 5.1 ×

Llama3 DistServe style 0.052 1.7 × 0.082 1.3 × 0.161 1.2 ×

Llama3 live vLLM serve n/a n/a 3.901 64.0 × n/a n/a Llama3 live SGLang serve n/a n/a n/a n/a 1.674 12.0 ×

Table 9: Experiment 2: Scaling benchmark of AAFLOW+ versus nearest non-AAFLOW+ competitor, SGLang prefix with 32768 context size 

AAF HF Backend AAF vLLM Backend AAF SGLang Backend Model Age LOW+ SGLang Speed LOW+ SGLang Speed LOW+ SGLang Speed nts total(s) total(s) up total(s) total(s) up total(s) total(s) up Mistral 1 30.70 119.13 3.88 × 67.10 263.40 3.93 × 91.62 353.92 3.86 ×

Mistral 2 30.70 224.85 7.32 × 67.71 484.22 7.15 × 90.49 679.06 7.50 ×

Mistral 4 58.37 436.28 7.47 × 121.86 899.15 7.38 × 176.53 1338.65 7.58 ×

Mistral 8 113.71 859.14 7.56 × 238.75 1796.07 7.52 × 348.13 2654.54 7.63 ×

Mistral 16 224.39 1704.86 7.60 × 465.45 3532.56 7.59 × 701.29 5363.03 7.65 ×

Llama3 1 29.06 112.39 3.87 × 36.02 141.03 3.91 × 43.40 167.96 3.87 ×

Llama3 2 29.06 216.89 7.46 × 36.01 259.80 7.21 × 44.80 335.59 7.49 ×

Llama3 4 56.35 425.88 7.56 × 66.26 492.36 7.43 × 84.45 638.82 7.56 ×

Llama3 8 110.91 843.85 7.61 × 128.62 968.75 7.53 × 159.17 1211.65 7.61 ×

Llama3 16 220.05 1679.81 7.63 × 253.53 1926.11 7.60 × 329.07 2514.49 7.64 ×

The memory results(Table 11) show that AAFLOW+ achieves the lowest peak KV footprint across all three backends because it rep-resents forked state through explicit shared ownership and lineage. For Mistral, the strongest gap appears against the fully duplicating baselines: AAFLOW+ uses 8.355 GiB on HF, while AAFLOW-text uses 53.986 GiB and DistServe style uses 50.995 GiB. Even the best local-prefix baselines remain significantly higher, with vLLM-prefix and SGLang-prefix both at 14.351 GiB, 14.591 GiB and KVCOMM at 15.702 GiB. On Llama3, AAFLOW+ uses 4.210 GiB on HF, while AAFLOW-text rises to 27.202 GiB and dense prefill to 25.188 GiB; the nearest local-prefix baselines remain around 7.2 GiB. The same ranking is preserved on vLLM and SGLang. On vLLM, Mistral AAFLOW+ uses 8.290 GiB, while AAFLOW-text is 53.568 GiB and KVCOMM is 15.580 GiB. On SGLang, Mistral AAFLOW+ again uses 8.290 GiB, while AAFLOW-text is 53.268 GiB and KVCOMM is 15.153 GiB. The advantage of AAFLOW+ lies in storing a single shared prefix state and allocating only branch-specific continuation states, while dense prefill and AAFLOW-text duplicate the entire prefix. DistServe methods add extra branch and staging state, re-sulting in memory usage similar to dense prefill. KVCOMM and 

> 19

Table 10: Experiment 3: Comparison of KV transfer cost to recomputing the prompt prefil. 

Model Bandwidth Beneficial HF Backend vLLM Backend SGLang Backend contexts Speedup vs Speedup vs Speedup vs Recompute Recompute Recompute Mistral 10 Gbps 5/8 2.46 × 2.54 × 2.86 ×

Mistral 25 Gbps 8/8 6.14 × 6.35 × 7.14 ×

Mistral 100 Gbps 8/8 24.54 × 25.39 × 28.55 ×

Mistral 200 Gbps 8/8 49.04 × 50.73 × 57.04 ×

Mistral 400 Gbps 8/8 97.90 × 101.29 × 113.88 ×

Llama3 10 Gbps 1/6 2.58 × 2.57 × 2.37 ×

Llama3 25 Gbps 6/6 6.44 × 6.43 × 5.92 ×

Llama3 100 Gbps 6/6 25.76 × 25.72 × 23.67 ×

Llama3 200 Gbps 6/6 51.48 × 51.39 × 47.30 ×

Llama3 400 Gbps 6/6 102.77 × 102.61 × 94.44 ×

Table 11: Experiment 4: Mean peak KV memory. 

HF Backend vLLM Backend SGLang Backend Model Baseline Mean peak Mean peak Mean peak KV (GiB) KV (GiB) KV (GiB) Mistral AAFLOW+ 8.355 8.290 8.290 Mistral dense prefill 49.987 49.600 49.510 Mistral AAFLOW-text 53.986 53.568 53.268 Mistral vLLM local prefix 14.351 14.240 14.113 Mistral SGLang prefix 14.591 14.338 14.142 Mistral KVCOMM 15.702 15.580 15.153 Mistral DistServe style 50.995 50.600 50.312 Llama3 AAFLOW+ 4.210 4.145 4.327 Llama3 dense prefill 25.188 24.800 24.212 Llama3 AAFLOW-text 27.202 26.784 26.319 Llama3 vLLM local prefix 7.231 7.120 6.851 Llama3 SGLang prefix 7.311 7.239 6.912 Llama3 KVCOMM 7.912 7.790 7.687 Llama3 DistServe style 25.695 25.300 25.128 local-prefix methods reduce duplication but lack explicit shared-state ownership, preventing them from achieving AAFLOW+’s peak memory efficiency. 

## F.5 Experiment 5: Throughput and Framework Overhead 

The goal is to measure effective generated-token throughput and modeled framework overhead Ω. AAFLOW+ should improve work-flow throughput by removing repeated prefill and reducing text orchestration. The throughput and overhead results (Table 12) show the clearest split between workflow execution and raw serving. Among the workflow rows, AAFLOW+ is best on every backend. For Mistral, AAFLOW+ reaches 302.61 tok/s on HF, compared with 39.62 tok/s for SGLang prefix, 38.81 tok/s for vLLM local prefix, 37.62 tok/s for DistServe style, 35.59 tok/s for KVCOMM, and about 32 tok/s for dense and AAFLOW-text. On vLLM, Mistral AAFLOW+ reaches 280.30 tok/s, while the strongest workflow competitor is 36.89 tok/s. On SGLang, Mistral AAFLOW+ reaches 207.09 tok/s, while the strongest workflow competitor is 27.10 tok/s. Llama3 shows the same pattern: AAFLOW+ reaches 300.57/314.26/256.84 tok/s across HF/vLLM/SGLang, whereas the strongest workflow competitor stays near 39.27/41.35/33.61 tok/s. The overhead values explain why AAFLOW+ keeps mean mod-eled framework overhead fixed at 0.0075 s across both models and all three backends. By contrast, AAFLOW-text and KVCOMM pay much larger overheads: for Mistral, AAFLOW-text incurs 11.1659 s on HF, 89.5948 s on vLLM, and 40.5748 s on SGLang, while KV-COMM incurs 21.6770 s, 174.3231 s, and 78.9242 s. Dense prefill in-curs minimal framework overhead but suffers from low throughput due to repeated full-prefix computation. Local-prefix and DistServe-style baselines also have modest overhead but fall short of AAFLOW+ because they retain workflow-level duplication of shared context. 

> 20

Table 12: Experiment 5: Mean throughput and overhead. n/a = not applicable, as that specific baseline is tightly coupled with that specific backend. 

HF Backend vLLM Backend SGLang Backend Model Baseline Throughput Mean Throughput Mean Throughput Mean (tok/s) Ω (s) (tok/s) Ω (s) (tok/s) Ω (s) Mistral AAFLOW+ 302.61 0.0075 280.30 0.0075 207.09 0.0075 Mistral dense prefill 31.94 0.0019 22.78 0.0019 20.99 0.0019 Mistral AAFLOW-text 31.84 11.1659 22.62 89.5948 20.91 40.5748 Mistral vLLM local prefix 38.81 0.0627 36.11 0.0627 26.54 0.0627 Mistral SGLang prefix 39.62 0.0657 36.89 0.0657 27.10 0.0657 Mistral KVCOMM 35.59 21.6770 29.67 174.3231 24.03 78.9242 Mistral DistServe style 37.62 0.0597 35.23 0.0597 25.93 0.0597 Mistral live SGLang serve n/a n/a n/a n/a 591.14 0.0 Mistral live vLLM serve n/a n/a 704.08 0.0 n/a n/a Llama3 AAFLOW+ 300.57 0.0075 314.26 0.0075 256.84 0.0075 Llama3 dense prefill 33.61 0.0019 25.83 0.0019 25.65 0.0019 Llama3 AAFLOW-text 33.54 6.7272 25.65 47.4580 25.54 23.4720 Llama3 vLLM local prefix 38.46 0.0627 40.48 0.0627 32.92 0.0627 Llama3 SGLang prefix 39.27 0.0657 41.35 0.0657 33.61 0.0657 Llama3 KVCOMM 36.16 13.0375 33.45 92.3380 29.63 45.6145 Llama3 DistServe style 37.46 0.0597 39.49 0.0597 32.15 0.0597 Llama3 live vLLM serve n/a n/a 801.55 0.0 n/a n/a Llama3 live SGLang serve n/a n/a n/a n/a 673.26 0.0 Although live vLLM and SGLang show higher raw throughput, these reflect optimized server performance, not explicit distributed state transfer. Thus, AAFLOW+ leads among workflow systems in this evaluation, with its remaining gap to live serving attributable to explicit accounting of distributed state-transfer costs, rather than concealing them within local engines.