Title: Analytic Concept-Centric Memory for Agentic Embodied Manipulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.29774v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 02:01:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
## Analytic Concept-Centric Memory for Agentic Embodied Manipulation 

Mingyang Sun 1,2,4 Xiujian Liang 2,3 Jiude Wei 5 Qichen He 2,5

Donglin Wang 4 Cewu Lu 2,5 Jianhua Sun 5*

> 1

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2Shanghai Innovation Institute, Shanghai, China 

> 3

Fudan University, Shanghai, China 4Westlake University, Hangzhou, China 

> 5

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China  

> sunmingyang@zju.edu.cn ,gothic@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract 

Long-horizon embodied manipulation requires agents to remember persistent objects, track changing scene states, and reuse prior interac-tion knowledge. However, existing agent mem-ories are often stored as unstructured histories or embedding-based records, making it diffi-cult to retrieve manipulation-relevant object parts, physical states, action effects, and exe-cutable skills. We propose an analytic concept-centric memory framework for agentic embod-ied manipulation. Our memory organizes ex-perience around structured analytic concepts, where objects are represented by semantic parts, parametric templates, grounded poses, affor-dances, and manipulation states. It further con-nects object and scene memories with transition memory for action-induced state changes and skill memory for template-grounded and policy-grounded execution. At runtime, the agent performs structured coarse-to-fine retrieval to identify relevant objects, states, transitions, and skills, supporting state-consistent reason-ing and skill reuse. Experiments on memory-dependent manipulation, articulated-object gen-eralization, real-world memory evaluation, and ablations show that our approach improves task completion, retrieval accuracy, object re-identification, and cross-object skill generaliza-tion over unstructured and embedding-based memory baselines. 

1 Introduction 

Embodied agents are expected to perform long-horizon robotic manipulation tasks in dynamic physical environments (Fang et al., 2019; Gervet et al., 2023; Fung et al., 2025). Such tasks require agents not only to perceive the current scene and execute actions, but also to remember persistent objects, track changing states, reuse previous in-teraction knowledge, and recover from execution failures. Without an explicit memory mechanism, 

> *Corresponding author.

an agent may repeatedly rediscover the same ob-ject, lose track of state changes, or fail to exploit prior experience when facing structurally similar objects and tasks (Hu et al., 2025). Recent agent memory systems have explored storing interaction histories, scene observations, textual summaries, visual embeddings, or episodic traces. While these memories provide useful con-text, they are often insufficient for robotic manipu-lation. Unstructured memories make it difficult to retrieve task-relevant object and state information efficiently. Embedding-based memories (Zhang et al., 2025b; Wang et al., 2025a) may capture sim-ilarity, but often lack explicit access to object parts, affordances, and action effects. Scene-level (Wang et al., 2025b) or episode-level memories (Zhu et al., 2024) usually describe what happened, but do not directly represent how object structures support manipulation or how actions change object states. Current approaches to long-horizon embodied tasks often follow two complementary routes: end-to-end VLA policies (Shi et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026) provide strong visuomotor execution but keep task reasoning and memory largely implicit, while agentic systems (Anwar et al., 2025; Lei et al., 2026; Tan et al., 2025) make planning and tool use explicit but often depend on manually specified skills or task-specific robot APIs. How-ever, neither line provides an explicit memory inter-face that is simultaneously language-addressable, object-structured, and execution-grounded. As a result, the agent may retrieve semantically relevant memories that are physically inapplicable, or select skills without verifying object states and part-level constraints. To address these limitations, we propose an Ana-lytic Concept-centric Memory (ACM ) for embod-ied agents. Our key motivation is that manipulation-relevant memory should be organized around struc-tured object concepts rather than raw observations or flat experience records. An analytic concept rep-1

> arXiv:2606.29774v1 [cs.RO] 29 Jun 2026

resents an object through semantic parts, paramet-ric templates, geometric attributes, and instance-specific grounding (Sun et al., 2024, 2025). This structured representation allows the agent to store what an object is, how it is composed, where it appears in a scene, how its state changes under ac-tions, and which executable skills can be applied to it. By making these elements explicit, analytic concept memory provides a bridge between percep-tion, memory retrieval, task reasoning, and robot execution. Our memory system combines stable template-level knowledge with dynamic experience memory. Stable libraries provide template synopses and para-metric analytic templates, while dynamic memories maintain grounded objects, scene states, action tran-sitions, and executable skills. At runtime, the agent queries memory conditioned on observations and instructions to ground the current scene, predict ac-tion effects, and select or parameterize executable skills. Execution outcomes are then written back to update memory, maintaining state consistency and accumulating reusable experience over episodes. Our contributions are threefold: • We propose a memory-augmented embodied agent pipeline for long-horizon manipulation, where task execution is grounded on persistent memory around structured object concepts rather than raw observations or unstructured experience records. • We introduce an analytic concept-centric memory organization that links object-centric analytic concepts, action transitions, and exe-cutable skills, enabling persistent object rea-soning and compositional manipulation. • We design a unified skill memory that bridges object-centric manipulation priors and task-centric learned policy skills, allowing the agent to connect structured memory retrieval with executable robot behaviors. We evaluate our approach on memory-dependent manipulation tasks that require object persistence, state tracking, action-effect reasoning, and general-ization across structurally similar objects. Analytic concept memory improves memory retrieval, ob-ject re-identification, and task success rate. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Embodied Agentic Systems 

Recent embodied AI systems increasingly adopt agentic frameworks for long-horizon and language-conditioned manipulation tasks (Salimpour et al., 2025; Liang et al., 2025). Hierarchical embodied agents typically decompose high-level goals into executable subtasks or reusable skills, combining planning modules with low-level robot controllers. Early systems such as SayCan (Ahn et al., 2022) and Code as Policies (Liang et al., 2023) leverage language models to select skills, invoke APIs, or synthesize executable programs for robot control. More recent approaches integrate stronger visual-language-action (VLA) (Brohan et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2024) policies into agentic execution loops, enabling improved planning, replanning, and skill composition for long-horizon manipulation (Yang et al., 2025; Lei et al., 2026). Recent works fur-ther explore modular policy composition and skill-centric execution. ThinkAct (Huang et al., 2026) combines reasoning modules with low-level ex-ecutors for closed-loop embodied execution, while LiLo-VLA (Yang et al., 2026) demonstrates that modular object-centric policies can improve com-positional manipulation through dynamic replan-ning and skill reuse. These works highlight the importance of hierar-chical reasoning and modular execution in embod-ied agents. However, existing systems primarily focus on planning and policy orchestration, while memory is often limited to short interaction his-tories, latent context windows, or unstructured re-trieval mechanisms. 

2.2 Memory for Agents 

Recent advances in agent memory have estab-lished memory as a fundamental component of LLM-based agents, enabling long-horizon reason-ing, continual adaptation, and environment interac-tion. Existing studies mainly categorize memory into token-level, parametric, and latent forms, fur-ther supporting factual, experiential, and working memory functionalities (Hu et al., 2025). Most current systems adopt token-level memory, where dialogue histories, trajectories, summaries, or ex-perience buffers are explicitly stored and retrieved, as exemplified by frameworks (Packer et al., 2023; Chhikara et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025a). However, most existing memory systems tar-get language/web agents or simplified simulations, 2and do not directly meet the needs of embodied robotics (Zheng et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2025; Fang et al., 2025). In real-world interaction, naively storing multimodal trajectories incurs high storage and retrieval overhead under real-time constraints. Moreover, many representations remain semantic-centric and weakly connected to grounded affor-dances and executable manipulation skills. As a result, existing approaches often memorize task-specific experiences but struggle to generalize manipulation knowledge across diverse objects and environments. These limitations motivate our ana-lytic concept-centric memory, which aims to unify object semantics, environment understanding, and manipulation skills into a compact and transferable memory representation for embodied agents. 

3 Preliminaries 

Language-conditioned embodied manipulation. 

We study long-horizon language-conditioned em-bodied manipulation, where an agent receives an instruction L and a sequence of visual observa-tions {ot}. We model execution hierarchically. At the task level, L is decomposed into subtasks 

l = {l1, . . . , l N }; at the execution level, each sub-task li is realized by a sequence of low-level robot actions ai = {ai, 1, . . . , a i,K i }. The full trajectory is a = {a1, . . . , aN }, where each ai,j denotes an executable robot command, such as an end-effector pose, trajectory command, or controller input. In our setting, subtask execution is conditioned on an external memory M:

ai = π(L, o t, l i, M),

where M provides persistent object identities, part-level structure, evolving scene state, action-effect knowledge, and executable skills beyond the cur-rent observation. 

Analytic concept representation. An analytic concept (Sun et al., 2024, 2025) is a structured, manipulation-aware representation of a physical object. Instead of representing an object as a raw vi-sual instance or a single embedding, it decomposes the object into semantic parts, geometric param-eters, poses, affordances, and manipulation tem-plates. Formally, an object O is represented as 

O = O(c, {Pi}Mi=1 ),

where c denotes the object category and Pi denotes the i-th semantic part. Each part is associated with a template type τi and instantiated as 

Pi = P(τi, Θi, T i, A i, Fτi ),

where τi links the part to a reusable template in the template library, Θi denotes the estimated ge-ometric parameters, Ti denotes the grounded 6D pose, Ai denotes part-level affordances, and Fτi

denotes the manipulation templates supported by this template type. This representation makes object structure ex-plicit while keeping the symbols reusable: tem-plate types define reusable part and manipulation structures, while grounded parameters and poses in-stantiate them into scene-specific object concepts. 

4 Method 

We propose an analytic concept-centric memory framework for long-horizon embodied manipula-tion. As shown in Figure 1, the framework main-tains a structured memory M that connects object-centric concepts, scene states, action transitions, and executable skills. At a high level, the agent first grounds observations into analytic concepts, retrieves task-relevant memory entries for the cur-rent subtask, selects or parameterizes an executable skill, and then writes execution outcomes back to memory. This closed loop allows the agent to main-tain persistent object identities, reason about state changes, and reuse manipulation knowledge across related objects and tasks. 

4.1 Analytic Concept Memory 

The memory M is organized around analytic con-cepts and consists of stable prior knowledge and dynamic experience memory : 

{M sem , Mtemp , Mobj , Mscene , Mtrans , Mskill }.

The stable components, Msem and Mtemp , pro-vide language-level template descriptions and para-metric analytic templates, respectively. The dy-namic components store grounded object instances, evolving scene states, action-induced transitions, and executable skills collected during interaction. 

4.1.1 Stable Prior Knowledge 

Stable prior knowledge contains two fixed libraries shared across episodes: a semantic library of tem-plate synopses and a template library of parametric analytic templates. Online observations and out-comes are written only to dynamic memory. 3I. Memory Construction & Update II. Analytic Concept Memory III. Embodied Agent Execution 

1. Scene & Task Parsing 

2. Analytic Concept Grounding 

3. Episode Analysis 

Stable Prior Knowledge 1. Memory Retrieval 

2. Reasoning & Action Selection 

3. Policy/Motion Execution 

Semantic Library Code Templates 

a. Object Memory b. Scene Memory 

c. Transition Memory d. Skill Memory 

RGB Observation   

> L: “Heat up the bread
> in the microware.”
> 1. Open Microwave Door;
> 2. Place bread inside;
> 3. Close door ;
> 4. Rotate timer knob.

Scene Elements 

High -level Steps 

> Consistency
> Check

Task Instruction                                           

> class L_Handle :
> [synopsis] Ahandle with alever
> and an axis, perpendicular to each
> other, forming an Lshape .
> def grasp_above (self) :
> [synopsis] Gripper aims at the lever,
> approaches from above for grasping .
> class Cuboid( GeometryTemplate ):
> def __ init __ (self, params) :
> self .height =params .height
> self.weight =params.weight
> class CurveHandle (ConceptTemplate ):
> def __ init __ (self, size, pose, 𝛼 ):
> handle_size =[size, 𝛼 ]
> shape =Curve( handle_size )…

RGB Observation  

> L: “ Slice the warmed
> bread. ”

• Concept -Grounded Skill 

• Policy -Grounded Skill            

> {“ atomic_action ”:“grasp”,
> “object_template ”:[‘Trifold_Handle ’],
> “parameters ”:{“ grasp_position ”:[…]}}
> {“ skill_name ”:“slice bread”,
> “policy_type ”:“VLA_Finetuned ”,
> “model_path ”:“./vla_slice_bread .pt ”}
> 1. “Open Microwave Door.”
> 2. “Extract Bread from Microwave. ”
> 3. “Close Microwave Door”
> 4. “Place Bread on Cutting Board”
> 5. “Slice Bread”

Memory Update 

Chain -of -Thought Reasoning 

Retrieve relevant memories based on current observation 

and partial task. 

Object Scene Transition Skill 

l1 l4 

l5 

Analyze the episode to extract state transitions and skills .

Build Object and Scene representations from observations. • Object identity 

• Structural concept 

• Parts & affordances 

• Scene snapshot 

• Object poses 

• Spatial relationship 

• (Object/Part, Action) 

→ State Change 

• Success & Failure    

> knife board microwave bread

Scene Graph  

> Table Surface
> Microwave Plate
> Bread
> Red Block
> Cutting Board
> Knife
> Knife
> Holder
> on
> on
> on
> on
> on
> on
> on
> right left

Transition Extraction 

High -level Steps 

End 

l2 

l1

(Object/Part, Action ) → State Change 

> Microwave
> <6D Pose >
> Bread
> <6D Pose >

⋯ ⋯

⋯

⋯

⋯inside 

l3 l4 Start 

l3 Start 

Structural Analytic Concept 

𝑠 

𝑠′ 𝑎 

Object 

Centric 

3D 

Concept 

Assets 

Concept 

Expert VLA 

Reward 

Guidance 

Manipulation Blueprints Structural Blueprints Analytic 

Concept      

> !!""#
> ℎ
> #
> $%$
> %"
> ℎ%!%ℱ!"##
> ℱ!"$%
> Progress Grasp Direction
> Microwave
> Body
> Door
> Handle
> Geometry
> Params

VFMs 

Object 

Centric 

3D 

Concept 

Assets 

Concept 

Expert VLA 

Reward 

Guidance 

Manipulation Blueprints Structural Blueprints Analytic 

Concept    

> !!""#
> ℎ
> #
> $%$
> %"
> ℎ%!%ℱ!"##
> ℱ!"$%

Progress Grasp Direction 

> Microwave
> Body
> Door
> Handle
> Geometry
> Params

VFMs 

𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑙 

Δ𝜃 

Skill Abstraction Figure 1: Overview of the proposed analytic concept-centric memory system. Stable semantic and template libraries provide reusable priors, while dynamic object, scene, transition, and skill memories store grounded instances, evolving states, and action effects. At runtime, the agent retrieves relevant entries to ground subtasks and select/parameterize executable skills, and then writes back observations and outcomes to continuously update memory. 

Semantic Library. The semantic library Msem 

stores natural-language synopses for templates in 

Mtemp . Each entry is indexed by the same tem-plate type τ as the template library: 

msem τ = ( τ, d τ , a τ , u τ ),

where dτ is a concise textual description of the template, aτ describes its interaction affordances, and uτ describes its intended functional use. For example, the synopsis of an L_Handle template describes it as a handle with a lever and an axis, where the lever supports grasping and the axis in-dicates the direction for pulling or rotation. These synopses provide a language-level interface for se-lecting template types during concept grounding, memory retrieval, and skill selection. 

Template Library. The template library Mtemp 

stores reusable analytic templates indexed by tem-plate type τ :

mtemp τ = ( τ, Ωτ , Fτ ),

where Ωτ denotes the valid parameter space of the template, and Fτ is the set of supported manipu-lation functions. During grounding, scene parsing modules, including object detection, part segmen-tation, pose estimation, and parameter estimation, bind a detected part to a template type τi and es-timate scene-specific values ( ˆΘi, ˆTi), producing a grounded part concept Pi. The manipulation func-tions in Fτ are implemented using the atomic prim-itives defined in Appendix B. Thus, templates pro-vide reusable symbolic and geometric blueprints, while object memory stores their scene-specific executable instantiations. 

4.1.2 Dynamic Experience Memory 

Dynamic memory records grounded information accumulated during interaction. Unlike stable prior knowledge, dynamic memory is updated online as the agent observes the scene, executes actions, and verifies their outcomes. 

Object Memory. Object memory Mobj main-tains persistent object-level analytic concepts grounded in the current environment: 

mobj k = ( id k, c k, {Pk,i }Mk

i=1 , T k, s k, h k).

Here, each part Pk,i reuses a template type τk,i 

from Mtemp and binds it with scene-specific pa-rameters, poses, affordances, and supported ma-nipulation functions estimated during grounding. Thus, each object memory entry is an executable AC instance: it preserves a persistent identity while retaining the template-level structure needed for retrieval and skill execution. 

Scene Memory. Scene memory Mscene tracks the evolving environment state. We represent a 4scene snapshot as a graph 

Gt = ( Vt, E t),

where nodes Vt correspond to object instances and edges Et encode spatial, visibility, containment, support, and state relations. Scene memory enables multi-step planning by retaining relations not fully observable at the current timestep. 

Transition Memory. Transition memory 

Mtrans stores action-induced state changes over grounded objects and parts: 

mtrans = ( id k, P k,i , u, s pre , s post , r ),

where id k is the persistent target object, Pk,i is the grounded target part, u is the executed skill or primitive action, spre and spost are pre- and post-action states, and r is the execution outcome. This links action effects directly to object-memory AC instances for later precondition checking and effect prediction. 

Skill Memory. Skill memory Mskill stores exe-cutable procedures: 

mskill u = ( u, type, τ, target, pre, Φ, π exec , η ),

where u identifies the skill, type denotes template-or policy-grounded execution, τ is the associated template type when applicable, target specifies the required object/part schema, pre denotes appli-cability conditions, Φ contains bound parameters, 

πexec is the execution backend, and η stores exe-cution statistics. Template-grounded skills bind 

f ∈ F τ to a grounded part Pk,i , while policy-grounded skills invoke learned policies for behav-iors that are hard to express with explicit templates. 

4.2 Memory Construction & Update 

This module converts instructions, observations, and execution outcomes into memory updates. Given (L, o t, Mt), it parses the task, grounds ob-served entities, resolves object identities, and up-dates object, scene, transition, and skill memories. 

4.2.1 Task and Scene Parsing 

The first stage extracts a task-scene context from the instruction and the current observation. The instruction L is decomposed into high-level sub-task candidates l = {l1, . . . , l N }. Meanwhile, the observation ot is parsed to detect task-relevant ob-jects, semantic parts, and environmental elements. The parser also extracts preliminary spatial, state, and functional relations, such as on , inside , open ,or graspable . The output is a structured context 

Qt = ( l, Ot, Rt),

where Ot denotes the set of observed entities and 

Rt denotes their preliminary relations. 

4.2.2 Object and Scene Concept Grounding 

Observed entities are grounded into analytic con-cepts and used to update object and scene memory. For each detected object, the agent localizes se-mantic parts, matches them to templates in Mtemp ,and instantiates a grounded analytic concept ˆOk

with part parameters, poses, affordances, and can-didate manipulation templates. Details of the tool-augmented perception and grounding pipeline are provided in Appendix A.1. A key step is object identity resolution. Given a newly grounded object ˆOk, the agent matches it to existing object memory entries through a hierarchi-cal filtering process. It first applies category and part-level consistency checks: 

Ck = Filter cat,part ( ˆOk, Mobj ).

Entries that fail these checks are discarded. For each remaining candidate mobj j ∈ C k, the agent computes 

Sk,j = λgSgeom + λT Spose + λrSrel .

If the best score exceeds a threshold, the observa-tion is merged with the corresponding persistent identity; otherwise, a new object entry is registered. After identity resolution, the agent updates the scene graph with persistent object nodes and ob-served spatial, visibility, containment, support, and state relations. 

4.2.3 Episode-Level Transition and Skill 

After executing a subtask or episode, the agent consolidates observed outcomes into transition and skill memories. For each executed skill or primitive action applied to a grounded object part, the agent records a transition entry 

mtrans = ( id k, P k,i , u, s pre , s post , r ),

where id k is the persistent target object, Pk,i is the grounded target part, u is the executed skill or primitive action, spre and spost are the states before and after execution, and r records the execution 5result. These entries link action effects directly to object-memory AC instances and provide state-change knowledge for later precondition checking and effect prediction. Successful template-based executions are further abstracted into template-grounded skills. Specifi-cally, when a manipulation function f ∈ F τk,i is successfully applied to a grounded part Pk,i , the agent stores a skill entry with the skill identifier u,associated template type τk,i , target schema, bound parameters Φ, execution backend πexec , outcome statistics η, and links to the corresponding transi-tion entries. Learned policies, such as finetuned VLA models, are stored as policy-grounded skills together with their input prompts, applicability con-ditions, execution parameters, and outcome statis-tics. Through this update process, scene-specific AC instances are converted into reusable transition and skill knowledge. The resulting memory supports state-consistent retrieval, object re-identification, and skill reuse in future long-horizon tasks. 

4.3 Structured Memory Retrieval 

Memory entries are indexed by object-centric and manipulation-aware keys, including object identi-ties, part types, affordances, geometric signatures, scene relations, object-part-action tuples, applica-bility conditions, and execution statistics. Given 

(L, o t, l i), retrieval follows a coarse-to-fine pro-cess: 

( Ct = Retrieve coarse (L, o t, l i),

Rt = Retrieve f ine (Ct, Mt).

The coarse stage identifies candidate categories, templates, and manipulation contexts, while the fine stage retrieves object, scene, transition, and skill entries. Fine retrieval uses hard filters such as category, part, and affordance consistency, fol-lowed by ranking based on geometry, pose, scene state, transition applicability, and skill statistics. 

4.4 Memory-Grounded Reasoning and Execution 

After retrieval, the agent integrates the retrieved object, scene, transition, and skill entries with the current subtask to select an executable action plan. The reasoning process checks whether candidate skills are applicable under the current scene state and whether their predicted effects are consistent with the task goal. For a candidate skill u, the agent first checks its precondition against the current scene state: 

Applicable( u, G t) = I[pre (u) ⊆ state (Gt)] .

If the skill is applicable, transition memory is used to estimate its expected effect: 

ˆst+1 = Apply( state (Gt), ef f ect (u)) .

This allows the agent to avoid redundant or incon-sistent actions. For example, if the scene mem-ory already records a microwave door as open , the agent should not select another open-door skill before placing the object inside. Once a grounded subtask is determined, the agent selects an executable skill from Rskill t .Template-grounded skills are instantiated from ma-nipulation templates with object-specific poses, part parameters, and execution constraints, and are executed by a motion planner or controller. Policy-grounded skills invoke learned policies, such as finetuned VLA models, for complex or perception-driven behaviors that are difficult to represent with explicit templates. The selected skill produces a low-level action sequence 

ai = {ai, 1, . . . , a i,K i },

which is executed in the environment. The ob-served outcome ot+1 is then compared with the predicted postcondition. If the outcome is verified, object states, scene relations, transitions, and skill statistics are updated accordingly. If execution fails or the observed state contradicts the prediction, the corresponding skill attempt is recorded as unsuc-cessful and the agent can re-query memory for an alternative skill. This closes the loop between struc-tured retrieval, state-consistent reasoning, physical execution, and memory update. The overall closed-loop procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

5 Experiments 

5.1 Memory-dependent Manipulation Results 

This section answers: Does memory improve agents on memory-dependent manipulation tasks? 

Benchmark. We evaluate on RMBench (Chen et al., 2026), a simulation benchmark comprising nine manipulation tasks with varying memory de-mands, designed to support controlled evaluation across different levels of task memory complexity. 6Task DP π0.5 Mem-0 ∗ Mem-VLA ∗ MemER Ours(CS) Ours(DP) Rearr. Blks 0% 13% 89% 20% 24% 95% 90% Put Back 0% 11% 90% 35% 42% 86% 92%                                        

> Swap Blks 11% 24% 67% 42% 51% 74% 72% Swap T 20% 15% 14% 55% 60% 73% 85%
> Battery Try10% 16% 28% 12% 14% 45% 51%
> Rank Try 10% 6% 18% 0% 2% 26% 29% Cover Blks 0% 0% 68% 31% 25% 64% 69%
> Total Avg 7% 12% 53% 28% 31% 66% 70%

Table 1: Success rate (SR, %) on RMBench. Total Avg is the average across all tasks. ∗ denotes manually implemented testing. 

Baselines. We compare against representative baselines aligned with the table columns. DP de-notes non-pretrained baselines. π0.5 (Black et al., 2025) is a reactive finetuned VLA that acts only on the current observation. Mem-0 and Mem-VLA (Shi et al., 2025) are memory-oriented robotic VLA policies. MemER (Sridhar et al., 2025) follows a dual-system design with keyframe re-trieval. For our variants, Ours(CS) uses only Concept-Grounded Skills, while Ours(DP) uses a pre-trained DP as the skill executor (distinct from the DP baseline column). 

Results. As shown in Table 1, our method achieves the best overall performance on RMBench. Compared with reactive policies such as DP and 

π0.5, our method benefits from persistent object, scene, and task-progress memory rather than rely-ing only on the current observation. Compared with memory-augmented VLA baselines and MemER-style experience retrieval, our analytic concept-centric memory explicitly indexes structural rep-resentations enabling the agent to retrieve state-and action-relevant entries instead of only visually similar contexts. This leads to more consistent subtask selection and fewer redundant or physi-cally inconsistent actions, especially on memory-demanding tasks. The complementary performance of Ours(CS) and Ours(DP) further suggests that our memory can support both concept-grounded skills and policy-based execution backends. 

5.2 Concept Generalization 

This section answers: Does analytic concept-centric memory improve manipulation knowledge transfer across articulated objects that share simi-lar part-level structures and affordances? 

Benchmark and task families. We evaluate on articulated object manipulation tasks from 

PartNet-Mobility (Xiang et al., 2020), following a commonly used generalization protocol (e.g., Where2Act (Mo et al., 2021)). The focus is concept-level transfer across articulated objects that share similar structure and affordances. The experimental details are provided in Appendix A.2. 

Task Settings. We evaluate two transfer settings: 

cross-instance transfer , which tests generalization to unseen instances within the same category (with varying geometry/scale/pose), and cross-object transfer , which tests transferring part-level manip-ulation knowledge across categories with similar articulation/affordances. 

Baselines. We compare against representative MLLM-based manipulation baselines, Mani-pLLM (Li et al., 2024) and A3VLM (Huang et al., 2024), which use multimodal reasoning to infer affordances and actions from RGB-D observations and language inputs. We also include a Semantic-memory baseline that stores object categories and affordances but lacks explicit part-structured tem-plates and manipulation knowledge. In contrast, our method augments MLLM reasoning with phys-ically grounded analytic concepts and structured memory for retrieval and reuse. 

Results. Table 2 summarizes concept gener-alization results under both transfer settings. We report success rate (SR, %) on unseen in-stances/categories, averaged within each category. Overall, our approach consistently improves SR across all categories. For cross-instance trans-fer , we outperform the strongest baseline (typically A3VLM), indicating better robustness to geomet-ric and pose variations within a category. Cross-object transfer is more challenging for prior meth-ods (e.g., A3VLM reaches at most 40.0 SR), yet our gains are larger: +8.1 on Washing Machine ,+3.1 on Kitchen Pot , and +10.6 on Safe . Notably, 

Semantic-memory lags far behind, suggesting that storing coarse category/affordance cues alone is in-sufficient; explicitly modeling reusable part-level templates and action effects is key to transferring manipulation knowledge across categories. 

5.3 Real-World Memory Evaluation 

We design five real-world tabletop tasks to eval-uate memory capability beyond simulation. De-tailed protocols and task descriptions are provided in Appendix A.3. These tasks require the agent to maintain object identity, track scene relations and object locations, remember searched regions, 7Category ManipLLM A3VLM Semantic-mem Ours                         

> Cross-instance transfer
> Microwave 41.5 49.7 20.4 52.2
> Storage Furniture 47.0 53.3 10.5 60.3
> Refrigerator 36.4 40.8 18.5 45.9
> Cross-object transfer
> Washing Machine 19.1 22.3 8.6 30.4
> Kitchen Pot 12.4 11.0 2.5 15.5
> Safe 37.0 40.0 10.5 50.6

Table 2: Concept generalization results. We report suc-cess rate (SR, %) on unseen instances/categories.                                                  

> Task Keyframe Retrieval Ours SR ↑RA ↑RE ↓SR ↑RA ↑RE ↓
> Slice Bread 75% –3.4 80% –0.9 Search 40% –8.9 75% –1.4 Return 80% 100% 3.0 90% 100% 1.3 Cube to Cup 30% 30% 3.5 90% 100% 1.5 Replace Block 55% 75% 3.8 85% 95% 1.4
> Avg. 56% 68% 4.5 84% 98% 1.3

Table 3: Real-world tabletop manipulation results. We compare our analytic concept-centric memory with a MemER-style keyframe retrieval baseline. 

reason over state transitions, and retrieve reusable skills. We compare our method with a MemER-style keyframe retrieval baseline, which stores and retrieves visual keyframes but does not explicitly structure memory by object concepts, scene states, transitions, or skills. We report task success rate, retrieval accuracy, and retrieval efficiency. 

Results. As shown in Table 3, our method im-proves the average success rate from 56% to 84% over the keyframe retrieval baseline, while also achieving higher retrieval accuracy and lower re-trieval effort. The improvement is most evident in tasks that require structured scene and object mem-ory. This is because keyframe retrieval mainly re-trieves visually similar observations and reasoning, whereas our memory explicitly indexes persistent object identities, scene relations, state transitions, and executable skills. As a result, the agent can re-trieve task-relevant memory entries more precisely, verify state-dependent preconditions, and select ap-propriate skills with fewer candidate inspections. Moreover, the structured representation narrows the retrieval search space, which also improves re-trieval efficiency in real-world execution. 

5.4 Ablation Study 

This section answers: How sensitive is our method to the choice of LLM model used for high-level                   

> LLM model RMBench SR ↑Retrieval acc. ↑Obj. re-id acc. ↑
> GPT-5.5 (main) 69% 95% 80% Gemini-3.1-pro 65% 89% 75% GPT-4o 67% 91% 80% Qwen-3.5 61% 88% 75%

Table 4: Sensitivity to the LLM model used in high-level reasoning. We report success rate on RMBench, retrieval accuracy, and object re-identification accuracy. 

reasoning? 

LLM model sensitivity. We vary the LLM model used by the high-level reasoning modules (e.g., sub-task decomposition, concept/skill selection, and memory query formulation), while keeping all non-LLM components fixed. The ablation settings are provided in Appendix A.4 Table 4 shows that the choice of reasoning LLM measurably affects both task performance (RM-Bench SR) and memory reliability (retrieval / re-identification). Stronger models improve SR and retrieval accuracy, suggesting that better subtask decomposition and more precise memory queries translate into more correct object/skill retrieval and, in turn, more state-consistent execution. We also observe that object re-identification is less vari-able than retrieval accuracy across models, indicat-ing that identity resolution benefits primarily from the structured analytic concept representation and matching signals, while the LLM mainly influences which entities and skills are queried and selected.. 

6 Conclusion 

We introduced an analytic concept-centric mem-ory framework for long-horizon agentic embod-ied manipulation. By organizing memory around reusable analytic templates, grounded object in-stances, scene states, action transitions, and ex-ecutable skills, the framework supports struc-tured retrieval, state-consistent reasoning, object re-identification, and skill reuse. Experiments on memory-dependent manipula-tion, concept generalization, real-world tasks, and ablations show that our method improves task com-pletion, retrieval correctness, and cross-object skill reuse over unstructured or embedding-based mem-ory alternatives. Future work will scale the tem-plate library to deformable objects, improve robust-ness to perception noise and state drift, and explore learning-based retrieval while preserving the inter-pretability of analytic concepts. 8References 

Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Haus-man, and 1 others. 2022. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691 .Abrar Anwar, John Welsh, Joydeep Biswas, Soha Pouya, and Yan Chang. 2025. Remembr: Building and rea-soning over long-horizon spatio-temporal memory for robot navigation. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pages 2838–2845. IEEE. Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Robert Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Manuel Y Galliker, and 1 others. 2025. π0.5: A vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. In 9th Annual Conference on Robot Learning .Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yev-gen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jas-mine Hsu, and 1 others. 2022. Rt-1: Robotics trans-former for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 .Tianxing Chen, Yuran Wang, Mingleyang Li, Yan Qin, Hao Shi, Zixuan Li, Yifan Hu, Yingsheng Zhang, Kaixuan Wang, Yue Chen, and 1 others. 2026. Rm-bench: Memory-dependent robotic manipulation benchmark with insights into policy design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.01229 .Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. 2025. Mem0: Building production-ready ai agents with scalable long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413 .Kuan Fang, Alexander Toshev, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio Savarese. 2019. Scene memory transformer for em-bodied agents in long-horizon tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 538–547. Runnan Fang, Yuan Liang, Xiaobin Wang, Jialong Wu, Shuofei Qiao, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Hua-jun Chen, and Ningyu Zhang. 2025. Memp: Ex-ploring agent procedural memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06433 .Pascale Fung, Yoram Bachrach, Asli Celikyilmaz, Kamalika Chaudhuri, Delong Chen, Willy Chung, Emmanuel Dupoux, Hongyu Gong, Hervé Jégou, Alessandro Lazaric, and 1 others. 2025. Embod-ied ai agents: Modeling the world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.22355 .Theophile Gervet, Soumith Chintala, Dhruv Batra, Jiten-dra Malik, and Devendra Singh Chaplot. 2023. Navi-gating to objects in the real world. Science Robotics ,8(79):eadf6991. Yuyang Hu, Shichun Liu, Yanwei Yue, Guibin Zhang, Boyang Liu, Fangyi Zhu, Jiahang Lin, Honglin Guo, Shihan Dou, Zhiheng Xi, and 1 others. 2025. Memory in the age of ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13564 .Chi-Pin Huang, Yueh-Hua Wu, Min-Hung Chen, Frank Wang, and Fu-En Yang. 2026. Thinkact: Vision-language-action reasoning via reinforced visual latent planning. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 38:82782–82802. Siyuan Huang, Haonan Chang, Yuhan Liu, Yimeng Zhu, Hao Dong, Peng Gao, Abdeslam Boularias, and Hongsheng Li. 2024. A3vlm: Actionable articulation-aware vision language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07549 .Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag San-keti, and 1 others. 2024. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 .Zixing Lei, Changxing Liu, Yichen Xiong, Minhao Xiong, Yuanzhuo Ding, Zhipeng Zhang, Weixin Li, and Siheng Chen. 2026. Towards long-horizon embodied agents with tool-aligned vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.13119 .Hang Li, Fengyi Shen, Dong Chen, Liudi Yang, Xudong Wang, Jinkui Shi, Zhenshan Bing, Ziyuan Liu, and Alois Knoll. 2026. Remem-vla: Empowering vision-language-action model with memory via dual-level recurrent queries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.12942 .Xiaoqi Li, Mingxu Zhang, Yiran Geng, Haoran Geng, Yuxing Long, Yan Shen, Renrui Zhang, Jiaming Liu, and Hao Dong. 2024. Manipllm: Embod-ied multimodal large language model for object-centric robotic manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition , pages 18061–18070. Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and Andy Zeng. 2023. Code as policies: Language model pro-grams for embodied control. In 2023 IEEE Interna-tional conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) ,pages 9493–9500. IEEE. Wenlong Liang, Rui Zhou, Yang Ma, Bing Zhang, Songlin Li, Yijia Liao, and Ping Kuang. 2025. Large model empowered embodied ai: A survey on decision-making and embodied learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10399 .Kaichun Mo, Leonidas J Guibas, Mustafa Mukadam, Abhinav Gupta, and Shubham Tulsiani. 2021. Where2act: From pixels to actions for articulated 3d objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision , pages 6813– 6823. 

9Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir_G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph_E Gonzalez. 2023. Memgpt: towards llms as operating systems. Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Rong-hang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Roman Rädle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, and 1 others. 2025. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 28085–28128. Sahar Salimpour, Lei Fu, Kajetan Rachwał, Pascal Bertrand, Kevin O’Sullivan, Robert Jakob, Farhad Keramat, Leonardo Militano, Giovanni Toffetti, Harry Edelman, and 1 others. 2025. Towards embod-ied agentic ai: Review and classification of llm-and vlm-driven robot autonomy and interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05294 .Hao Shi, Bin Xie, Yingfei Liu, Lin Sun, Fengrong Liu, Tiancai Wang, Erjin Zhou, Haoqiang Fan, Xi-angyu Zhang, and Gao Huang. 2025. Memoryvla: Perceptual-cognitive memory in vision-language-action models for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19236 .Ajay Sridhar, Jennifer Pan, Satvik Sharma, and Chelsea Finn. 2025. Memer: Scaling up memory for robot control via experience retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.20328 .Jianhua Sun, Yuxuan Li, Jiude Wei, Longfei Xu, Nange Wang, Yining Zhang, and Cewu Lu. 2025. Arti-pg: A toolbox for procedurally synthesizing large-scale and diverse articulated objects with rich annotations. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-ence on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 6396–6405. Jianhua Sun, Yuxuan Li, Longfei Xu, Nange Wang, Jiude Wei, Yining Zhang, and Cewu Lu. 2024. Con-ceptfactory: Facilitate 3d object knowledge annota-tion with object conceptualization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 75454–75467. Curran Associates, Inc. Huajie Tan, Xiaoshuai Hao, Cheng Chi, Minglan Lin, Yaoxu Lyu, Mingyu Cao, Dong Liang, Zhuo Chen, Mengsi Lyu, Cheng Peng, and 1 others. 2025. Ro-boos: A hierarchical embodied framework for cross-embodiment and multi-agent collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03673 .Yu Wang, Dmitry Krotov, Yuanzhe Hu, Yifan Gao, Wangchunshu Zhou, Julian Mcauley, Dan Gutfreund, Rogerio Feris, and Zexue He. 2025a. M+: Extend-ing memoryllm with scalable long-term memory. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning .Zixuan Wang, Bo Yu, Junzhe Zhao, Wenhao Sun, Sai Hou, Shuai Liang, Xing Hu, Yinhe Han, and Yim-ing Gan. 2025b. Karma: Augmenting embodied ai agents with long-and-short term memory systems. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 1–8. IEEE. Bowen Wen, Wei Yang, Jan Kautz, and Stan Birchfield. 2024. Foundationpose: Unified 6d pose estimation and tracking of novel objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 17868–17879. Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanxiao Jiang, Yifu Yuan, He Wang, and 1 others. 2020. Sapien: A simulated part-based interactive environment. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 11097–11107. Yue Yang, Shuo Cheng, Yu Fang, Homanga Bharad-hwaj, Mingyu Ding, Gedas Bertasius, and Daniel Szafir. 2026. Lilo-vla: Compositional long-horizon manipulation via linked object-centric policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.21531 .Zhejian Yang, Yongchao Chen, Xueyang Zhou, Jiangyue Yan, Dingjie Song, Yinuo Liu, Yuting Li, Yu Zhang, Pan Zhou, Hechang Chen, and Lichao Sun. 2025. Agentic robot: A brain-inspired framework for vision-language-action models in embodied agents. 

Preprint , arXiv:2505.23450. Rui Ye, Zhongwang Zhang, Kuan Li, Huifeng Yin, Zhengwei Tao, Yida Zhao, Liangcai Su, Liwen Zhang, Zile Qiao, Xinyu Wang, and 1 others. 2025. Agentfold: Long-horizon web agents with proactive context management. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24699 .Jenny Zhang, Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, Robert Lange, and Jeff Clune. 2025a. Darwin godel machine: Open-ended evolution of self-improving agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22954 .Lingfeng Zhang, Yuecheng Liu, Zhanguang Zhang, Matin Aghaei, Yaochen Hu, Hongjian Gu, Mo-hammad Ali Alomrani, David Gamaliel Arcos Bravo, Raika Karimi, Atia Hamidizadeh, and 1 others. 2025b. Mem2ego: Empowering vision-language models with global-to-ego memory for long-horizon embodied navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14254 .Hengshuang Zhao, Li Jiang, Jiaya Jia, Philip HS Torr, and Vladlen Koltun. 2021. Point transformer. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 16259–16268. Boyuan Zheng, Michael Y Fatemi, Xiaolong Jin, Zora Zhiruo Wang, Apurva Gandhi, Yueqi Song, Yu Gu, Jayanth Srinivasa, Gaowen Liu, Graham Neu-big, and 1 others. 2025. Skillweaver: Web agents can self-improve by discovering and honing skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07079 .Yichen Zhu, Zhicai Ou, Xiaofeng Mou, and Jian Tang. 2024. Retrieval-augmented embodied agents. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 17985–17995. 

10 A Implementation Details 

A.1 Perception and Concept Grounding 

We implement perception and analytic concept grounding as a tool-augmented process, as illus-trated in Fig. 2. Instead of relying on a monolithic perception model, the agent invokes a set of vision foundation models and analytic estimators as exter-nal tools. Given an RGB-D observation, the agent first identifies task-relevant objects and candidate parts with VLM-guided object/part recognition and SAM-based (Ravi et al., 2025) segmentation. The resulting masks are then passed to pose and param-eter estimation tools, such as FoundationPose (Wen et al., 2024) for 6D pose estimation and template-specific parameter estimators for structural fitting. For structural parameter estimation, we adopt a Point-Transformer (Zhao et al., 2021) encoder that extracts 128 groups of points with group size 32 

from the input point cloud and applies 12 attention layers with 6 heads each. We then apply average pooling to obtain a global point-cloud feature, fol-lowed by a three-layer MLP with ReLU activations to regress the template-specific structural parame-ters. The grounding process is organized around tem-plate types. For each detected part, the agent se-lects a candidate template type τi according to the semantic synopsis in Msem and the structural tem-plate in Mtemp . The perception tools estimate scene-specific parameters and poses, denoted as 

( ˆΘi, ˆTi), which are then bound to the matched tem-plate mtemp τi . This produces a grounded part-level analytic concept 

Pi = P(τi, ˆΘi, ˆTi, A i, Fτi ),

where Ai denotes the inferred part affordance and 

Fτi denotes the manipulation functions supported by the corresponding template type. After part-level grounding, the agent assembles grounded parts into an object-level analytic concept. The object-level concept stores the persistent ob-ject identity, template-instantiated parts, estimated geometry, grounded poses, and supported manipu-lation functions. These grounded concepts are writ-ten into object memory and linked to scene memory through spatial and state relations. In this way, the output of visual tools is not stored as raw masks or embeddings, but converted into executable analytic concept entries that can be retrieved, reasoned over, and reused by the embodied agent. In addition to structural grounding, the same template linkage is used to derive part-level and object-level programs. Part-level programs expose reusable functions defined by the matched tem-plates, such as estimating a drawer translation axis, computing a containable region, or generating a handle grasp pose. Object-level programs compose these part-level functions into executable routines, such as opening a drawer and placing an object inside. Thus, concept grounding provides both a structured memory entry and a programmatic inter-face for downstream skill selection and execution. Our method does not assume perfect perception. Missing, low-confidence, or inconsistent tool out-puts are treated as partial observations and do not overwrite existing object memory unless verified by later observations or execution feedback. This de-sign allows the agent to benefit from strong vision foundation models while keeping memory explicit, structured, and updateable. 

A.2 Concept Generalization: Experimental Details 

This subsection provides additional details for the concept generalization experiments in Section 5.2. 

Environments and categories. We evaluate ar-ticulated object manipulation in simulation us-ing the SAPIEN simulator (Xiang et al., 2020), with tasks drawn from ManiSkill and assets from 

PartNet-Mobility . Each episode contains a single articulated target object with a manipulable part (e.g., a door, lid, or handle) whose kinematic state is observable only through perception and interac-tion. 

Episode initialization. In each trial, the target object is placed at the center of the scene. The articulated joint configuration is randomized, with a 50% probability of starting from the fully closed state and a 50% probability of starting from an open configuration sampled randomly along the joint’s range of motion. We use an RGB-D camera with known intrinsic parameters that points toward the scene center and is positioned on the upper hemisphere, with azimuth sampled uniformly from 

[0 ◦, 360 ◦) and elevation sampled uniformly from 

[30 ◦, 60 ◦].

Success criteria and metrics. We evaluate with success rate (SR, %), defined as the ratio of suc-cessful trials to the total number of test trials. A trial is considered successful if the target joint’s 11 Structure  Identification 

Template Organization and Grounding Part -level Program Selection Object -level Program Synthesis 

P. { 

“part_level programs”:{ 

“Regular_Drawer ”: 

“translation_axis ”, 

“containable_area ”

“Curve_Handle ”: 

“grasp_pose ”

}} 

O. {

“object_level programs”:{ 

“open_drawer_place_stapler ”:        

> “““
> def open_drawer_place_stapler (
> self, stapler_grasp_pose ):
> drawer_grasp_pose =self.handle .\
> grasp_pose ()
> translation_axis =self.drawer .\
> translation_axis ()
> unit_translation = …
> return trajectory = …
> ”””

}} 

SAM                                               

> RGB Mask
> Object -level Programs
> Storage Furniture
> Body
> Door
> Drawer
> Handle
> Foundation -
> Pose
> Structure
> Param Est.
> 6-DoF
> Pose Est.
> <Multilayer_Body > Param Est.
> <Cuboidal_ Door> Param Est.
> <Cuboidal_Drawer > Param Est.
> <Curved_Handle > Param Est.
> Param Estimation
> Params
> 𝒉 𝒐
> 𝒘 𝒐
> 𝒍 𝒊
> 𝒉 𝒊
> 𝒍 𝒐
> ∆𝒉
> 𝒍
> 𝒉
> 𝒍 𝒐
> 𝒘 𝒐
> 𝒉 𝒐
> 𝒍 𝒊
> 𝒉 𝒊
> 𝒘 𝒓
> 𝜽
> 𝒘
> Concept
> Instance
> def grasp_pose (self):
> return 𝐑 𝟎 ,𝟎 ,rota3on 𝟐 ×\
> 𝐓 𝟎 ,−radius /𝟐 ,𝟎 𝐑 (…)
> F. Manipulation Function Bind
> def translation_axis (self):
> return .𝒙 =posi3on 𝟎
> 𝒚 =posi3on 𝟏 +height /𝟐
> def containable_area (self):
> return 4
> |𝒙 −posi3on 𝟎 |<offse tx
> 𝟎 <𝒚 −posi3on 𝟏 <height
> 𝒛 −posi3on 𝟐 <offse tz

Observation VLM 

> Point -
> Transformer

Figure 2: Perception and analytic concept grounding. The agent invokes visual foundation models and analytic estimators as tools to convert observations into executable analytic concepts. VLM-guided structure identification and SAM-based segmentation provide object and part masks, while pose and parameter estimation tools instantiate matched templates into grounded part concepts. The resulting part-level programs are composed into object-level programs for downstream manipulation. 

movement exceeds 0.01 (in simulator length units) or exceeds 0.5 when normalized by the joint’s maxi-mum motion range. SR is averaged over evaluation episodes and then averaged within each category as reported in Table 2. We use identical success predicates for all methods to ensure comparability. 

Interaction budget. We adopt an interaction bud-get of 5 for each action proposal. 

Reporting. Unless otherwise stated, we use the same prompting templates and output schemas across methods within each setting, and we ag-gregate results across randomized initializations to reduce sensitivity to a single pose or viewpoint. 

A.3 Real-Robot Experimental Setup Perception. We use five RGB-D cameras (Intel RealSense D435): two wrist-mounted cameras, one egocentric (end-effector) camera, and two third-person cameras. 

Compute. The system runs on a workstation equipped with an Intel Core i9-14900K processor, 64GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU, enabling real-time inference and planning. 

Metrics. In addition to success rate, we empha-size retrieval correctness and efficiency: • Success rate (SR): fraction of episodes with full task completion within the episode hori-zon. • Retrieval accuracy: for each subtask-level retrieval query, we mark it correct only if both 

(i) the retrieved target object identity matches the intended object instance and (ii) the re-trieved skill (template- or policy-grounded) matches the intended manipulation procedure. Retrieval accuracy is the mean correctness over all subtask queries. • Retrieval efficiency: (i) average end-to-end query latency. 

Tasks. We evaluate on five real-world tabletop tasks (Table 5), each specified by a preceding con-text task and a target task that stresses particular memory capabilities. 

A.4 Ablation protocol (Table 4). 

We change only the LLM used for high-level rea-soning (subtask decomposition, concept/skill selec-tion, and memory query formulation). All non-LLM components (perception/grounding, struc-tured memory indexing, retrieval, identity resolu-tion, and low-level execution) are kept fixed. We use the same prompts and output schemas across models to ensure a controlled comparison. 12 1 2   

> 3
> 1. Slice Heated Bread 2. Search Bread in Cabinet
> 3. Return Stapler 4. Place Cube into Third Cup 5. Replace Block in Kitchen Pot

Figure 3: Real-world experimental setup for the tabletop manipulation tasks in Section 5.3. 

B Atomic Manipulation Primitives 

The manipulation functions in Fτ are implemented by composing a small set of atomic manipulation primitives (Table 6). Each primitive corresponds to a low-level, robot-executable operation (e.g., reach-ing, grasping, or contact-driven pushing) with a standardized interface over grounded objects/parts and geometric parameters. Given a grounded an-alytic concept P = P(τ, Θ, T, A, Fτ ), a template function f ∈ F τ first derives the required argu-ments (target poses, axes, or goal positions) from 

(Θ , T, A ) and the current scene state, and then in-vokes the appropriate primitive(s). More complex behaviors—such as opening an articulated compo-nent or inserting an object—are realized as short sequences of primitives with intermediate state checks, enabling consistent execution and outcome logging for transition and skill memory updates. 13 Task Slice Heated Bread Preceding task Heat the bread in a microwave. 

Task description Retrieve the heated bread, place it on the cutting board, and slice it with the knife. 

Main challenge Scene memory for bread location; skill memory for microwave operation and slicing. 

Task Search Bread in Cabinet Preceding task –

Task description Search the cabinet and find the bread. 

Main challenge Scene memory for searched locations. 

Task Return Stapler Preceding task Observe the stapler at its initial location and move it to another workspace region. 

Task description Put the stapler back to its original location. 

Main challenge Object memory for persistent identity; scene memory for original location. 

Task Place Cube into Third Cup Preceding task Arrange multiple cups in order; optionally change cup positions. 

Task description Pick up the cube and place it into the third cup. 

Main challenge Transition memory for tracking cup order; object memory for target cup disambiguation. 

Task Replace Block in Kitchen Pot Preceding task A block with a random color is placed into the Kitchen Pot. 

Task description Replace the block in the Kitchen Pot with another specified color block. 

Main challenge Scene memory for the hidden block location. 

Table 5: Real-world tabletop tasks for evaluating analytic concept-centric memory. The tasks cover different memory capabilities, including object identity, scene relations, state transitions, search history, and reusable skill selection. 

Primitive Definition 

grasp(obj) The robot establishes a stable grasp on the target object by closing the gripper or applying a holding constraint through the end-effector. The action results in the object becoming attached to the manipulator for subsequent manipulation. 

reach(obj) The manipulator moves toward the target object while maintaining the current gripper state unchanged. The action terminates before grasping, contact-driven translation, or any interaction that changes the object state occurs. 

move(pos, obj) The manipulator translates the end-effector or a grasped object toward a target position defined relative to a reference object or workspace region, while maintaining the current grasp configura-tion unchanged. The action represents spatial relocation without intentional contact interaction. 

flip(obj, axis) The robot rotates the target object around a specified axis, typically by approximately 180 ◦,such that the object’s vertical orientation, exposed surface, or functional side becomes inverted. Unlike general rotational adjustment, this primitive emphasizes discrete orientation reversal. 

rotate(obj, axis, angle) 

The robot changes the orientation or articulated state of the target object through rotational motion without causing vertical inversion. This primitive includes in-plane pose adjustment, 3D orientation alignment, and manipulation of rotational joints or mechanisms. 

pull(obj, pos) The end-effector establishes pulling contact with the target object and moves backward relative to the object, generating traction that causes the object to translate toward the target position. The action terminates once object motion ceases and contact is released. 

push(obj, pos) The end-effector makes contact with the target object and applies forward translational force, causing the object to move toward a target position under sustained contact. The action ends when the object stops moving and the pushing contact is terminated. 

insert(obj1, obj2) The robot aligns object obj1 with an opening, slot, cavity, or receptacle associated with obj2 ,and subsequently translates obj1 along the insertion axis until partial or full engagement is achieved. The action emphasizes constrained motion under geometric alignment. 

release(obj) The robot removes the grasping constraint from the target object by opening the gripper or disengaging the holding mechanism. After completion, the object is no longer mechanically constrained by the manipulator and remains free in the environment. 

Table 6: Definitions of atomic manipulation primitives used for analytic concept decomposition. 

14 Algorithm 1 Closed-Loop Analytic Concept-Centric Memory Agent 

Require: Stable semantic library Msem , template library Mtemp 

1: Initialize dynamic memories Mobj , Mscene , Mtrans , Mskill 

2: M ← {M sem , Mtemp , Mobj , Mscene , Mtrans , Mskill }

3: while agent is active do 

4: Receive an episode instruction L

5: Observe current scene ot

▷ Memory-guided task parsing 

6: Retrieve relevant past objects, states, transitions, and skills from M

7: Decompose L into subtasks l = {l1, . . . , l N } conditioned on retrieved memory 8: for each subtask li ∈ l do 

9: Observe current scene ot

▷ Phase I: Memory construction and grounding 

10: Parse ot to obtain candidate objects, parts, and scene relations 11: Invoke perception tools for detection, segmentation, pose estimation, and parameter estimation 12: for each detected part do 

13: Match it to a template type τ using Msem and Mtemp 

14: Instantiate grounded part concept 

Pk,j = P(τk,j , ˆΘk,j , ˆTk,j , A k,j , Fτk,j )

15: end for 

16: Resolve persistent object identities and update object memory Mobj 

17: Update scene memory Mscene with object states and scene relations 

▷ Phase II: Memory-grounded execution 

18: Retrieve task-relevant memory entries: 

Rt = Retrieve f ine (Retrieve coarse (L, o t, l i), M)

19: Obtain candidate objects, scene states, transitions, and skills from Rt

20: for each candidate skill u do 

21: Check preconditions with current scene state: 

App( u, G t) = I[pre (u) ⊆ state (Gt)] 

22: Predict expected postcondition using transition memory 23: end for 

24: Select an applicable skill u∗ consistent with subtask li

25: Instantiate u∗ with grounded object and part parameters 26: Send the resulting low-level action sequence to the robot executor 

▷ Feedback and memory update 

27: Observe execution feedback and updated observation ot+1 

28: if the predicted postcondition is verified then 

29: Update object and scene states in Mobj and Mscene 

30: Record transition 

mtrans = ( id k , P k,j , u ∗, s pre , s post , r )

31: Update skill statistics in Mskill 

32: else 

33: Mark the skill attempt as failed and update skill statistics 34: Re-query memory or select an alternative skill in the next loop 35: end if 

36: t ← t + 1 

37: end for 

38: end while 

15