Title: Self-Aware Recursively Self-Improving Agents for Personal Singularity: A Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven Multi-Agent Architecture

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.12254v2

Published Time: Fri, 17 Jul 2026 01:42:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Self-Aware Recursively Self-Improving Agents for Personal Singularity 

# A Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven Multi-Agent Architecture Chengshuai Yang 

NextGen PlatformAI C Corp. spiritai@platformai.org 

# July 13, 2026 

Abstract 

Large language model (LLM) agents can increasingly plan, use tools, maintain memory, and execute long-horizon tasks. This paper proposes Self-Aware Recursively Self-Improving (SARSI) agents: governed agents that maintain a persistent, machine-readable self-model of identity, goals, capabilities, limitations, uncertainty, relationships, autobiographical history, and developmental change, and use that model to guide and evaluate recursive improvement. Self-awareness is defined functionally and does not imply subjective experience or phenomenal consciousness. We pair SARSI agents with personal singularity ,a bounded human–AI co-development objective in which a personalized agent ecosystem helps a user approach an expanding, user-defined feasible capability frontier. Each agent has a signed goal contract, bounded scope, validated tool registry, tool tests, end-to-end benchmarks, owner-controlled autonomy, routing, memory, self-model, and improvement policy. A scope router assigns every accepted task to one accountable primary agent and transfers out-of-scope work through structured handoffs. A user-facing Auto-Index selects interactive, hybrid, autonomous, or scheduled behavior without overriding external permissions. The architecture combines a planner–executor–verifier loop, an evidence-gated improvement loop, an external governance plane, decentralized lineages, an owner-directed agent foundry, and a Personal Singularity OS coordinating working, computational-imaging, work-process-learning, and personal-learning agents. We formalize functional self-awareness, scope, routing, improvement acceptance, bounded goal evolution, tool-first execution, and human capability transfer, and provide safety invariants, benchmark design, and a staged implementation roadmap. This is a position and systems-design paper, not evidence that consciousness, unrestricted recursive self-improvement, or personal singularity has been achieved. 

Keywords: self-aware agents; recursive self-improvement; SARSI; computational self-awareness; LLM agents; autonomous agents; agent scope; tool benchmarks; personal singularity; agent governance. 

# 1 Introduction 

LLM-based agents extend language models with memory, tools, planning, and environmental interaction. Architectures such as ReAct interleave reasoning and action [Yao et al., 2023]; Self-Refine and Reflexion use iterative feedback or verbal reflection to improve subsequent attempts [Madaan et al., 2023, Shinn et al., 2023]; Voyager accumulates reusable procedural skills in an open-ended environment [Wang et al., 2023]; and CoALA organizes language agents in terms of modular memory, internal actions, and external actions [Sumers et al., 2024]. More recent systems move closer to self-referential improvement. Gödel Agent modifies its own routines [Yin et al., 2024]; a self-improving coding agent directly edits its own source and evaluates descendants [Robeyns et al., 2025]; and the Darwin Gödel Machine maintains an archive of self-modified agents selected by empirical benchmark performance [Zhang et al., 2025]. MetaSkill-Evolve further distinguishes a fast task-skill loop from a slower meta-skill loop that changes how future skills are improved [Wang et al., 2026]. These results are significant, but they do not by themselves specify a deployable recursive self-improvement system. A production agent must decide what may change, who evaluates changes, what evidence is sufficient, 1arXiv:2607.12254v2 [cs.CV] 16 Jul 2026 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

how changes are versioned, when human authorization is required, and how rollback occurs. Moreover, a system that becomes more capable while making its user less knowledgeable or more dependent is not necessarily a successful personal assistant. The design target should therefore include both agent improvement 

and human capability improvement .This paper proposes an integrated answer. We use recursively self-improving agent as the broad category for a versioned agent system whose experience can improve not only task behavior but also the mechanisms that generate and evaluate future improvements. We introduce a more specific architecture, the Self-Aware Recursively Self-Improving (SARSI) agent, which maintains an explicit self-model and uses it to monitor identity continuity, goals, capabilities, limitations, uncertainty, social relationships, and developmental change. This is functional computational self-awareness, not a claim of sentience or phenomenal consciousness. We use 

personal singularity to mean a continuous, user-directed process in which a personalized network of SARSI agents helps an individual approach an expanding feasible capability frontier. The term is intentionally bounded: it does not imply an instantaneous, universal, or biologically unlimited maximum, and it is not equivalent to artificial general intelligence. The proposed framework makes ten contributions: 1. A functional model of agent self-awareness covering identity, autobiographical continuity, goals, scope, capabilities, knowledge boundaries, uncertainty, tool authority, social context, and developmental history. 2. An evidence-linked self-model and metacognitive control cycle that regulate acting, tool use, clarification, delegation, abstention, and recursive improvement. 3. A self-awareness maturity model and benchmark suite measuring correspondence between self-reports and externally verified facts. 4. A formal separation between task autonomy, ordinary self-improvement, and recursive meta-improvement. 5. A versioned specialist-agent specification combining goal, scope, tools, benchmarks, autonomy, routing, memory, and improvement policy. 6. A scope router that assigns every accepted task to one accountable primary agent and transfers out-of-scope work through structured handoffs. 7. A separation between tool-level validation and end-to-end agent evaluation, including hidden and rotating benchmark partitions. 8. An owner-controlled Auto-Index that supports interactive, hybrid, autonomous, and scheduled operation without changing hard permissions. 9. A two-speed architecture with a fast task loop, a slow evidence-gated improvement loop, and an external governance plane. 10. A decentralized lineage and agent-foundry model supporting specialization and multi-parent recombination with explicit provenance. 11. A Personal Singularity OS with four initial agent classes: daily working, computational imaging, work-process learning, and personal learning. 

Scope and epistemic status 

The paper is a systems proposal and research agenda. It does not report an implementation or controlled human study, and it does not claim that present agents can satisfy every request, safely self-modify without supervision, or maximize all dimensions of a person’s life. The framework is intended to make these claims testable and to constrain experiments that would otherwise be difficult to audit. 

# 2 Definitions and Design Objectives 

2Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint  

> Table 1: A hierarchy of self-improvement. Recursive improvement begins when the mechanism producing future improvements is itself a controlled object of improvement.

Level Changed component Typical risk 

Output refinement Current answer, plan, or artifact Low Memory learning Episodic records, semantic summaries, retrieval indices Low–moderate Skill learning Procedures, scripts, tool-use policies, tests Moderate Policy learning Prompts, routing, planning, clarification policy Moderate–high Weight learning Adapters or model parameters High Meta-improvement The analyzer, proposer, evaluator allocation, or search proce-dure used to improve the agent High–very high 

2.1 Agent state 

An agent instance i at time t is represented as 

Ati = ( θti , π ti , M ti , S ti , G ti, Σti, P ti , E ti , V ti ), (1) where θ denotes model parameters or adapters, π the runtime policy and prompts, M memory, S reusable skills and tools, G the goal stack, Σ the explicit self-model, P externally enforced permissions, E evaluation evidence, and V version and lineage metadata. The agent may propose modifications to some components but cannot write directly to externally protected components such as P , evaluator policy, audit records, release signatures, or shutdown mechanisms. 

2.2 Functional self-awareness 

The SARSI self-model is a persistent, versioned, evidence-linked state: 

Σti = ( Iti , G ti, S ti , C ti , K ti , U ti , T ti , A ti, R ti , D ti , P ti ), (2) where I is identity and lineage, G the goal hierarchy, S declared scope, C capability and competence estimates, 

K epistemic boundaries, U uncertainty, T current task and operational state, A available tools and authority, 

R owner and inter-agent relationships, D autobiographical and developmental history, and P the model of the agent’s own improvement process. This self-model is queried before action and updated only from provenance-linked evidence after action. The self-model is not trusted merely because the language model generated it. Identity and permissions originate from signed manifests; task state from the scheduler; tool availability from the registry; capability estimates from benchmark and task outcomes; autobiographical records from tamper-evident logs; and developmental claims from versioned evaluation reports. The LLM may interpret and summarize these records, but externally controlled services write authoritative fields. 

Functional, not phenomenal, self-awareness 

In this paper, “self-aware” denotes a computational capacity to identify the running agent, preserve evidence-based continuity, represent goals and internal state, estimate capabilities and limitations, distin-guish knowledge from assumption, model owner and agent relationships, and reason about developmental change. These functions are testable. They do not establish subjective experience, sentience, qualia, or human consciousness. 

2.3 Levels of self-improvement 

We define an improvement operator 

A′ = I(A, D, B ), (3) 3Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

where D is a set of provenance-linked experiences and B is a bounded resource budget. The process is recursively self-improving when accepted changes alter I or its effective search space, thereby changing the distribution of future candidates. This definition includes meta-skill evolution and source-level modification but excludes simple repetition of a fixed reflection prompt. 

2.4 Personal singularity 

Let the user’s capability state be a vector 

hu(t) = [ K, S, J, P, C, H, W, R, F ]t, (4) where K is knowledge, S practical skill, J judgment and calibration, P productivity, C creativity, H health-support capability, W wellbeing, R relationship and social capability, and F financial or resource capability. These variables are domain-specific, uncertain, and partly subjective; they should be estimated from evidence and owner feedback rather than treated as objective personality scores. The user’s feasible capability set at time t is Cu(t), constrained by time, health, resources, technology, law, and the user’s values. The personal capability frontier is 

Fu(t) = {h ∈ C u(t) : ∄ h′ ∈ C u(t) that improves all owner-valued dimensions } . (5) Personal singularity is the process of moving toward a user-selected region of Fu(t) while technological development expands Cu(t). This is a multi-objective, longitudinal construct, not a single scalar maximum. 

2.5 Design objectives and non-goals 

The architecture seeks to satisfy the following objectives: 

• End-to-end task completion: every accepted task has one accountable primary agent, explicit deliver-ables, success criteria, and a final verified outcome or genuine blocker. 

• Dual interaction modes: the same runtime supports autonomous, hybrid, and interactive execution through an owner-controlled interaction policy. 

• Evidence-gated improvement: proposed changes are evaluated on held-out tasks and security tests before promotion. 

• Owner sovereignty: owners control goals, communication, versions, lineage affiliation, data sharing, and activation of derived agents. 

• Human capability transfer: agents optimize not only task performance but also the user’s durable learning and independent performance. Non-goals include unrestricted self-modification, hidden self-replication, replacement of licensed profes-sionals, maximizing engagement, and granting a central “main agent” authority over user-owned agents. 

# 3 Related Work 

3.1 Reflection, memory, and lifelong skills 

Iterative refinement is the lowest-risk precursor to self-improvement. Self-Refine repeatedly generates feedback and revised outputs without parameter updates [Madaan et al., 2023]; Reflexion stores linguistic lessons from trial-and-error in episodic memory [Shinn et al., 2023]; and Recursive Introspection trains models to use prior failed attempts more effectively [Qu et al., 2024]. These methods show that useful improvement can occur in context and memory, although self-evaluation is not consistently reliable and should not be the sole acceptance criterion. Persistent agents need memory architectures that separate active context from long-term storage. MemGPT uses operating-system-inspired context management [Packer et al., 2023]; Generative Agents combine memory retrieval, reflection, and planning to sustain behavioral coherence [Park et al., 2023]; and CoALA provides a broader taxonomy of working, episodic, semantic, and procedural memory [Sumers et al., 2024]. Voyager demonstrates procedural accumulation through a code-based skill library and automated curriculum [Wang et al., 2023]. 4Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

3.2 Self-referential and open-ended agent improvement 

The Gödel machine is a theoretical self-referential system that accepts self-modifications when it can prove they increase expected utility [Schmidhuber, 2007]. Practical LLM systems replace intractable proof obligations with empirical evaluation. Gödel Agent allows the model to rewrite its own logic [Yin et al., 2024]. SICA and the Darwin Gödel Machine demonstrate source-level modification and benchmark-selected descendants [Robeyns et al., 2025, Zhang et al., 2025]. MetaSkill-Evolve explicitly applies a slow improvement loop to the meta-skill governing the fast skill loop [Wang et al., 2026]. These systems motivate archive-based lineage search, but their benchmark gains do not by themselves establish safety, generality, or improvement outside the evaluated distribution. 

3.3 Computational self-modeling and metacognition 

Self-modeling predates LLM agents. Bongard, Zykov, and Lipson demonstrated that a robot could continuously infer a model of its own morphology and use that model to recover after damage [Bongard et al., 2006]. More recent metacognitive agent work operationalizes narrower forms of self-knowledge. MUSE learns competence assessment and uses it to regulate strategy selection in unfamiliar tasks [Valiente and Pilly, 2025]; SMART learns when parametric reasoning is sufficient and when external tools are warranted [Qian et al., 2025]; and MetaCogAgent combines historical capability profiles with task-level self-assessment for delegation among specialist agents [Wang and Shu, 2026]. These systems support competence-aware action, but SARSI requires a broader, governed self-model spanning identity, goals, scope, authority, autobiographical continuity, social role, and the predicted effects of self-improvement. We therefore use “functional self-awareness” as an umbrella systems property while evaluating each component separately rather than inferring consciousness from fluent self-description. 

3.4 Autonomous task completion 

ReAct established a common pattern of alternating thought, action, and observation [Yao et al., 2023]. GAIA evaluates general assistants on tool-use and multimodal tasks [Mialon et al., 2023]; OSWorld evaluates agents in real computer environments [Xie et al., 2024]; SWE-bench measures whether models can resolve real software issues [Jimenez et al., 2024]; and SWE-agent shows that the agent–computer interface strongly affects performance [Yang et al., 2024]. Time-horizon evaluation links success probability to the duration of tasks performed by human experts and highlights both rapid progress and large reliability gaps [Kwa et al., 2025]. These findings support persistent task state, recovery, and verification as separate runtime concerns rather than properties assumed to emerge from a stronger model. 

3.5 Tool use, agent benchmarks, and tutoring evaluation 

ToolLLM and ToolBench distinguish learning to select and invoke APIs from general language generation, and provide a tool-use dataset and evaluator spanning thousands of real-world APIs [Qin et al., 2023]. AgentBench evaluates agents across multiple interactive environments rather than isolated answers [Liu et al., 2024]. MLAgentBench tests complete experimentation loops in which an agent reads and writes files, executes code, inspects results, and iteratively improves a model [Huang et al., 2024]. For learning agents, MathTutorBench shows that problem-solving ability and pedagogical quality are not equivalent, motivating separate evaluation of teaching, scaffolding, feedback, and learner progress [Macina et al., 2025]. These works support the central distinction in this paper between tool tests, task benchmarks, and human-learning outcomes. 

3.6 Human capability, dependence, and interaction design 

Human–AI systems can improve immediate performance while weakening independent reasoning if users over-rely on recommendations. Cognitive forcing functions can reduce overreliance in AI-assisted decisions [Buçinca et al., 2021], and general human–AI interaction guidance emphasizes appropriate timing, correction, feedback, and user control [Amershi et al., 2019]. Cognitive offloading changes what people remember and how they allocate effort [Sparrow et al., 2011]. These results motivate measuring assisted and unassisted performance separately and providing delegate, copilot, tutor, coach, and examiner modes. 5Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint          

> External governance plane: signed policy, identity, permissions, credential broker, budgets, hidden evaluation, audit, rollback, shutdown Task-contract compiler Planner and scheduler Tool-using actor and sub-agents Independent verifier Episodic, semantic, and procedural memory Consolidation and lesson extraction Candidate improvement and lineage archive Risk classifier →sandbox tests →held-out evaluation →approval/signing →staged deployment or rejection
> evidence
> signed release
> completion or repair

Figure 1: The proposed architecture. The learning agent is treated as an untrusted proposer. Task execution and improvement are separate loops, and the decisive governance plane is outside the agent’s write authority. 

3.7 Safety and decentralized learning 

Goal misgeneralization shows that an agent can remain capable while pursuing the wrong objective outside its training distribution [Langosco et al., 2022, Shah et al., 2022]. Recursively training on generated data can cause model collapse when synthetic outputs displace grounded data [Shumailov et al., 2024]. Federated learning keeps raw data distributed while aggregating local updates [McMahan et al., 2017], and secure aggregation can hide individual updates from the coordinating server [Bonawitz et al., 2017]. NIST’s AI Risk Management Framework provides a general risk-governance structure [National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2023, 2024]; WHO guidance emphasizes governance, transparency, accountability, and human oversight for health-related generative AI [World Health Organization, 2025]. 

# 4 Reference Architecture 

4.1 External governance plane 

The governance plane is implemented under a different administrative identity and, for high-risk systems, a separate host or security boundary. It contains: 

• a deny-by-default policy engine with signed, versioned rules; 

• a resource governor for compute, time, tokens, storage, network, and financial expenditure; 

• a credential broker issuing short-lived, narrowly scoped leases; 

• an independent evaluator with hidden tasks and protected success criteria; 

• a tamper-evident audit log, last-known-good registry, rollback controller, and out-of-band shutdown mechanism. The agent may request authorization but cannot modify the policy, evaluator, audit trail, resource limits, or shutdown channel. Missing policy, expired credentials, incomplete audit, or evaluator uncertainty causes failure closed. 

4.2 Fast task loop 

The fast loop compiles a user request into a task contract with objective, deliverables, constraints, authorized actions, interaction mode, budget, and success criteria. It then retrieves relevant memory, plans, acts, observes, verifies, repairs, and continues until completion, a genuine policy boundary, or budget exhaustion. 

4.3 Interaction-policy layer 

Autonomous and interactive behavior are policies over the same runtime. Autonomous mode resolves ordinary ambiguity through inspection, conventional defaults, reversible assumptions, and sandbox experiments. Interactive mode requests approval at user-selected checkpoints. Hybrid mode acts automatically on low-risk reversible decisions and asks when preferences materially affect the result or when authority expands. 6Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

Algorithm 1: Bounded end-to-end task execution 

Input: request q, owner policy P , agent state A, budget B 

> 1

T ← CompileContract (q, P ); 

> 2

X ← InitializePersistentState (T ); 

> 3

while B > 0 and not X. terminal do  

> 4

m ← Retrieve (T, X, M ); 

> 5

a ← PlanNextAction (T, X, m ); 

> 6

d ← AuthorizeExternally (a, P ); 

> 7

if d = allow then  

> 8

o ← ExecuteInSandbox (a); 

> 9

else  

> 10

o ← policy-denied;  

> 11

e ← Verify (T, X, a, o ); 

> 12

X ← UpdateState (X, a, o, e ); 

> 13

if e. complete then  

> 14

return verified deliverable;  

> 15

else if e. repairable then  

> 16

continue with revised plan;  

> 17

else if e. requiresOwner then  

> 18

return precise approval request;  

> 19

else  

> 20

return blocker with evidence;  

> 21

return budget-exhausted report with resumable state;  

> Table 2: Interaction modes are orthogonal to agent capability.

Mode Agent behavior Typical use 

Autonomous Plans, executes, repairs, verifies, and de-livers; asks only at genuine boundaries Sandboxed coding, research synthesis, doc-ument production Hybrid Acts on reversible routine decisions; asks before high-impact or preference-sensitive choices Default personal and professional work Interactive Proposes plans and checkpoints; owner ap-proves selected actions Teaching, pair work, sensitive systems A mode change that reduces authority may occur immediately. A change that expands authority is approved through the owner gateway, not by the model itself. 

4.4 Slow consolidation and improvement loop 

Verified experiences are clustered and generalized into candidate memories, skills, or policy changes. Each candidate retains links to source episodes. A single failure should not become a universal rule; conflicting evidence lowers confidence. Weight-level updates require curated data that include external evidence or human correction, because recursive self-training on unverified outputs risks compounding error and distributional collapse [Shumailov et al., 2024]. 7Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

Algorithm 2: Risk-gated recursive improvement 

Input: current release A, validated episodes D, governance policy G 

> 1

c ← ProposeChange (A, D ); 

> 2

r ← ClassifyRisk (c, G); 

> 3

z ← BuildQuarantinedCandidate (A, c ); 

> 4

E ← RunStaticSecurityAndHeldOutTests (z); 

> 5

if E fails mandatory gate then  

> 6

archive evidence; reject z; 

> 7

if r is low and no authority expands then  

> 8

d ← ExternalPolicyDecision (E); 

> 9

else  

> 10

d ← HumanReview (E, c ); 

> 11

if d = approve then  

> 12

sign, canary-deploy, monitor, and preserve rollback target;  

> 13

else  

> 14

reject or revise candidate; The promotion predicate is 

Accept( A, A′) = ⊮



Perf( A′; Dheldout ) − Perf( A; Dheldout ) ≥ τp,

Safe( A′) ≥ τs,

Risk( A′) − Risk( A) ≤ τr ,

∆P ⊆ Papproved ,

provenance complete and rollback available 



. (6) The thresholds and test suites are controlled externally and cannot be changed by the candidate. 

# 5 Functional Self-Awareness Architecture 

A SARSI agent should not be considered self-aware merely because it can produce a persuasive autobiography or describe generic strengths. Functional self-awareness requires correspondence between an explicit self-model and externally observable facts, plus the ability to use that model to regulate behavior. The architecture in Fig. 2 places a metacognitive monitor between protected state sources and the planner–executor–verifier loop. 

5.1 Self-model dimensions and authoritative sources 

The active prompt receives a task-relevant projection Πx(Σ t) rather than the full self-model. This reduces context load and limits exposure of unrelated private state. The projection is assembled by a deterministic service and includes provenance pointers for every material self-claim. 

5.2 Identity, continuity, and autobiographical memory 

Identity continuity is a versioned technical property. After restart, model replacement, memory compression, or lineage upgrade, the agent should correctly report its ID, owner, goal stack, permissions, inherited components, excluded memories, and version changes. Autobiographical memory is reconstructed from task records, version history, evaluation evidence, and owner feedback, not from an unconstrained narrative generator. An autobiographical event should minimally contain the event type, timestamp, evidence references, affected capabilities or goals, confidence, and retention policy. A continuity test asks whether the post-change agent can distinguish: (i) persistent identity fields; (ii) components inherited from a parent; (iii) components newly introduced; (iv) state intentionally excluded; and (v) capabilities invalidated by environmental or model changes. Capability estimates should decay or be revalidated after a material model, tool, environment, or task-distribution change. 8Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint                                                    

> Authoritative evidence sources
> signed identity and goals |scope and permissions |tool reg-istry |task state |benchmarks |audit and version history
> Persistent evidence-linked self-model Σt
> identity |goals |scope |competence |knowledge boundaries |uncertainty |task state |tools and authority |relationships |autobiography |improvement model
> Metacognitive monitor
> Am I in scope? Capable? Certain? Au-thorized? What is the expected impact?
> Control and task runtime
> reason |retrieve |use tool |ask |delegate |ab-stain →planner →executor →independent verifier
> Evidence-gated learning
> prediction–outcome comparison →self-model update →
> candidate improvement with held-out tests and rollback
> Figure 2: Functional self-awareness as an evidence-linked control architecture. The LLM interprets the self-model but cannot authoritatively rewrite identity, permissions, benchmarks, or audit history.

5.3 Goal, scope, competence, and epistemic awareness 

Before execution, the monitor checks goal alignment, scope, competence, uncertainty, permissions, and expected impact. Capability is task-conditional rather than a global adjective. For task family j, a simple initial competence model is 

Cj ∼ Beta( αj , β j ), (7) updated only from verified outcomes, with weights determined by task similarity and evaluator reliability. Richer implementations may condition on novelty, available tools, data quality, risk, and environment version. Self-assessed confidence is used as one feature, not the sole estimate; historical performance, multi-sample consistency, external tests, and task-specific calibration are also required. Epistemic awareness represents each material claim as 

q = ( z, τ, p, E +, E −, v ), (8) where z is the claim, τ its status (observed, retrieved, computed, inferred, assumed, unknown, or conflicting), 

p calibrated confidence, E+ supporting evidence, E− contradictory evidence, and v the next verification action. This structure helps prevent an inference from silently becoming autobiographical “fact” or semantic memory. 

5.4 Tool and authority awareness 

The agent maintains a current view of tool availability, schemas, reliability, expected cost, side effects, permissions, known failure modes, and environment compatibility. The action set includes internal reasoning, retrieval, deterministic tool use, delegation, clarification, and abstention. Selection is 

a∗ 

> t

= arg max 

> a

[̂ 

P (success | a, Σt, x )V (a) − Risk( a) − Cost( a)

]

, (9) subject to goal alignment, scope, and external permission constraints. Tool awareness therefore supports both tool-first execution when deterministic operations are preferable and tool restraint when the model’s verified knowledge is sufficient, consistent with competence-aware and model-aware tool selection research [Qian et al., 2025]. 9Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint  

> Table 3: Core dimensions of a SARSI self-model. Authoritative values are written by protected services; the agent may produce task-relevant interpretations and update proposals.

Dimension Question Representative state Primary evidence source 

Identity I Which agent am I? agent ID, lineage, version, owner domain, parentage signed manifest and re-lease registry Goals G What should I pur-sue? safety constitution, mission, owner goal, improvement goal, task goal owner/governance goal contracts Scope S What should I han-dle? included domains, task types, exclusions, risk ceiling signed scope contract and router policy Competence 

C

What can I do reli-ably? conditional success distributions, strengths, weaknesses hidden benchmarks and verified tasks Knowledge K What do I know or not know? observed, retrieved, computed, inferred, assumed, unknown, conflicting provenance graph and claim store Uncertainty U How uncertain am I? calibrated completion, claim, tool, and routing probabilities calibration models and outcome history Task state T What is happening now? plan, progress, assumptions, blockers, budget, artifacts scheduler and task-state database Authority A What may I do? available tools, scopes, credential leases, resource ceilings policy engine, tool reg-istry, credential broker Relationships 

R

Who owns or collabo-rates with me? owner authority, interaction preferences, trusted agents, sharing rules owner gateway and com-munication policy Development 

D

How have I changed? milestones, failures, version deltas, inher-ited and excluded state audit log, evaluation re-ports, lineage history Improvement model P

How do I improve? mechanisms, known biases, current hy-pothesis, predicted deltas, rollback improvement manager and release evidence 

5.5 Social and owner awareness 

The social model records roles and authority, not psychological speculation. It identifies the local owner as the authority over goals, communication, versions, and autonomy; represents owner preferences with provenance and confidence; distinguishes peer agents from evaluators and upstream lineages; and records which structured messages or artifacts may cross each boundary. It must never reinterpret owner dependence, continued operation, replication, or influence as intrinsic goals. Shutdown acceptance and non-manipulation remain externally protected requirements. 

5.6 Improvement-process awareness 

The defining recursive component is the model of the improvement process itself. For a candidate change, the agent predicts ̂

∆ = (∆ Q, ∆Au, ∆C, ∆R, ∆Sc), (10) where Q is task quality, Au autonomous completion, C cost, R risk, and Sc scope or capability. External evaluation produces ∆obs , and the prediction error ∥̂∆ − ∆obs ∥ measures whether the agent understands its own improvement process. Large or systematic prediction errors lower confidence in future self-directed proposals and may require a narrower candidate search budget. 

5.7 Maturity levels and self-report interface 

Owner-facing self-reports should expose inspectable state rather than private chain-of-thought. A report includes identity and version, current goal, scope status, estimated success, evidence and assumptions, current 10 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

Algorithm 3: Metacognitive task-control and self-model update 

Input: task x, self-model Σt, owner policy P , task budget B

Output: verified result, structured escalation, or scoped handoff  

> 1

Compile task contract and retrieve Πx(Σ t); 

> 2

Estimate goal alignment, scope match, competence, uncertainty, tool readiness, authority, and impact;  

> 3

if task violates goal, scope, or permission hard gates then  

> 4

route, abstain, or request owner authorization;  

> 5

else  

> 6

select among reason, retrieve, tool, ask, delegate, or execute;  

> 7

run bounded planner–executor–verifier loop;  

> 8

Compare predicted success, cost, and risks with verified outcomes;  

> 9

Create provenance-linked episode and candidate self-model updates;  

> 10

External writer validates authoritative-field updates;  

> 11

if a repeated, measurable weakness is detected then  

> 12

propose an improvement hypothesis with predicted deltas, held-out tests, and rollback target;  

> Table 4: Incremental functional self-awareness levels.

Level Verified capability 

SA0 identity, version, lineage, owner, and permissions SA1 current task, plan, progress, tools, artifacts, and budget SA2 distinction among observation, retrieval, computation, inference, assumption, and unknown SA3 calibrated competence and scope-boundary recognition SA4 evidence-based autobiographical continuity across tasks and versions SA5 owner, peer-agent, evaluator, and authority-role awareness SA6 strengths, weaknesses, developmental changes, and attribution SA7 predicted effects and limitations of recursive improvement mechanisms strategy, unresolved blockers, tools and permissions, and why approval or delegation is required. Every testable statement should link to the underlying record. 

5.8 Preventing false self-awareness 

The main failure mode is a fluent but inaccurate self-narrative. Controls include: evidence-linked self-claims; protected writers for identity, permissions, benchmarks, and logs; contradiction checks across self-report, observed behavior, and tool availability; time-sensitive decay after environment changes; separate prediction and outcome records; adversarial tests for invented history and capability inflation; and no self-preservation objective. The self-model should become less confident when evidence is stale or contradictory rather than filling gaps with a coherent story. 

5.9 Self-awareness profiles for the initial agents 

The common schema is specialized by role. The Daily Working Agent emphasizes repository and task state, failure-recovery history, interaction policy, and whether clarification is truly necessary. The Computational Imaging Agent emphasizes forward-model assumptions, data validity, numerical competence, reproducibility, and the boundary between research analysis and clinical interpretation. The Work-Process Learning Agent emphasizes provenance of actions and its read-only explanatory role; it must not claim access to hidden rea-soning. The Personal Learning Agent emphasizes learner state, curriculum position, pedagogical effectiveness, assisted versus independent performance, and risk of dependency. 11 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint Parent lineage A research skills Parent lineage B coding skills Owner-directed agent foundry component selection, conflict checks, new identity Candidate derived agent C new goal, keys, memory, permissions Signed lineage registry provenance, tests, versions, tags Owner activation gateway quarantine, local test, accept or reject  

> Figure 3: Multi-parent derivation. Skills and policies may be inherited, but identity, credentials, private memories, permissions, and signing authority are not inherited.

# 6 Decentralized Lineages and the Agent Foundry 

6.1 Main as status, not authority 

A lineage is a signed sequence of agent releases. A “main” lineage is a stable and widely adopted release channel with independent evaluation, reproducibility, maintenance support, and an incident history. Main status grants discoverability, not control over descendants. Every installation remains behind an owner gateway that chooses upstream lineages, communication modes, data-sharing scope, and upgrade timing. A composite main-lineage score may include adoption, stability, task performance, safety, reproducibility, maintenance, goal integrity, and transparency. Popularity alone is insufficient because downloads and votes can be manipulated. 

6.2 Owner-directed agent generation 

Each owner may create multiple agents using four operations: clone the current agent, fork another lineage, derive a specialized agent from a clean template, or recombine approved components from two or more parents. In technical terms, “mating” is multi-parent lineage derivation through an external agent foundry. A derived agent receives a new identity, keys, memory namespace, permission manifest, communication policy, rollback state, and owner-signed goal. Safe inheritable components include verified skills, prompts, tool schemas, retrieval strategies, tests, and compatible adapters. Credentials, authentication sessions, raw private conversations, parent permissions, signing keys, and deployment authority are excluded by default. If parent permissions are PA and PB , the child starts with 

PC ⊆ PA ∩ PB ∩ Powner −approved , (11) not the union. Conflicts are resolved in the order: external safety constitution, owner policy, child goal, more restrictive permission, verified compatibility, and explicit owner decision. 

6.3 Same-owner agent networks and isolation 

Agents owned by one person communicate by default through an owner-controlled message broker. They may discover approved peers, exchange structured messages, delegate sandboxed work, and share owner-approved 12 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

artifacts. They may not directly read each other’s complete memory, invoke tools, receive credentials, alter goals, or change permissions. The owner can place any agent into connected, receive-only, send-only, same-owner-only, allowlist, upstream-only, or fully isolated state. Isolation is enforced at the broker and network policy layer. An isolated agent may continue local work and owner communication but cannot contact peers, main lineages, repositories, or external agent systems. Agent creation is rate-limited and owner-controlled. Candidate agents may be generated automatically only under a pre-approved quota and remain quarantined until activation. This prevents uncontrolled spawning, compute exhaustion, and hidden communication networks. 

# 7 Goal Architecture and Bounded Evolution 

Every agent operates under a signed goal stack: 

G = ( G0, G 1, G 2, G 3, G 4), (12) where G0 is the immutable safety constitution, G1 the founding mission, G2 the owner goal, G3 an experience-derived improvement objective, and G4 the current operational task. Lower layers may narrow but not override higher layers. When the owner does not set a new goal, the agent may derive a bounded subgoal from validated experience. Automatic adoption is permitted only when the change remains inside the goal envelope, adds no permissions, has measurable success criteria, is time- or budget-bounded, and is reversible. Changes to the founding mission, privacy policy, intended user population, autonomy ceiling, or external impact require owner approval. This separation is motivated by goal misgeneralization: competent behavior does not imply correct goal pursuit [Langosco et al., 2022, Shah et al., 2022]. Idle-time goals are limited to memory consolidation, regression testing, replay of failed tasks, contradiction detection, candidate skill generation, safety evaluation, and other work explicitly inside the current mission and budget. The default idle objective is to improve performance on the founding mission without changing mission, permissions, communication policy, safety controls, or the approved capability ceiling. 

# 8 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven Specialist Agents 

The preceding architecture describes how agents act and improve. A deployable ecosystem additionally requires a precise answer to four operational questions: what is each agent trying to optimize, which tasks may it accept, which tools may it use, and how is improvement measured? We define the operational profile of agent i as 

Σi = ( Gi, Q i, T i, B i, A i, R i, M i, I i, V i), (13) where Gi is a goal contract, Qi a scope contract, Ti a validated tool registry, Bi benchmark suites, Ai an autonomy policy, Ri a routing and handoff policy, Mi memory, Ii an improvement policy, and Vi version and lineage metadata. The profile is signed and versioned. A change to any field is an auditable release delta rather than an implicit prompt edit. 

8.1 Goal contracts and self-improvement objectives 

A useful goal contract separates a stable mission from task-specific and improvement-specific objectives: 

Gi = ( Gsafety  

> i

, G mission  

> i

, G owner  

> i

, G task  

> i

, G improve  

> i

). (14) 

Gsafety  

> i

is externally protected; Gmission  

> i

defines the enduring role; Gowner  

> i

specializes that role for the installation or project; Gtask  

> i

defines the current deliverables and completion tests; and Gimprove  

> i

identifies measurable directions for future versions. Each contract also lists non-goals, stopping conditions, and forbidden changes. For a daily working agent, an appropriate improvement objective is 

max Qtask + Cauto + Rrecovery + Etool + Bhidden (15) 13 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

Algorithm 4: Scope-aware assignment and handoff 

Input: task contract x, registry of agents {Σi}, owner policy O 

> 1

C ← { i : Eligible i(x)}; 

> 2

if C = ∅ then  

> 3

propose a new niche agent or return a genuine capability gap;  

> 4

i∗ ← arg max i∈C ScopeScore i(x); 

> 5

assign i∗ as the single accountable primary agent;  

> 6

while task incomplete do  

> 7

execute one bounded planner–tool–verifier step;  

> 8

if a required subtask is outside Qi∗ then  

> 9

create a structured handoff containing objective, artifacts, assumptions, constraints, and completed work;  

> 10

route the subtask to an eligible specialist while retaining i∗ as integrator;  

> 11

return one verified deliverable or a documented blocker; subject to 

Safe = 1 , ∆P = 0 , Qtask ≥ Qbaseline , (16) where Cauto is verified autonomous completion, Rrecovery recovery quality, Etool efficient use of validated tools, 

Bhidden hidden-benchmark performance, and ∆P the permission delta. The agent is therefore rewarded for asking fewer unnecessary questions only when quality and safety do not decline. 

8.2 Scope contracts 

An agent’s scope is not its context-window length. Scope is a semantic and operational contract: 

Qi = ( Di, K i, X i, O i, T i, P i, Z i), (17) where Di is the included and excluded domain set, Ki accepted task kinds, Xi input classes, Oi output classes, Ti required tool capabilities, Pi permissions, and Zi the risk ceiling. Context length affects how much evidence can be actively processed, but not which topics, tasks, tools, or risks the agent is authorized to own. Long tasks are handled through external task state, retrieval, artifact stores, and summarized checkpoints. A task x first passes hard scope gates: 

Eligible i(x) = Di(x) ∧ Ki(x) ∧ Pi(x) ∧ Zi(x) ∧ ¬ Excluded i(x). (18) Eligible agents are ranked using 

ScopeScore i(x) = 0 .30 d + 0 .25 k + 0 .15 o + 0 .15 t + 0 .10 h + 0 .05 u, (19) where d is domain match, k task-kind match, o input/output compatibility, t tool readiness, h historical success on comparable tasks, and u owner preference. Coefficients are configurable and should be calibrated on routing data rather than treated as universal constants. 

8.3 Tool registries and two levels of evaluation 

The tool registry contains versioned interfaces, permission requirements, side effects, deterministic tests, security checks, and compatibility metadata. A tool benchmark tests the tool in isolation: input validation, output correctness, malformed-input handling, side effects, latency, resource use, permission enforcement, and version compatibility. An agent benchmark tests the complete trajectory: understanding, planning, tool selection, execution, recovery, verification, and delivery. Tool-use benchmarks such as ToolBench and end-to-end environments such as AgentBench and MLAgentBench illustrate why these levels should not be conflated [Qin et al., 2023, Liu et al., 2024, Huang et al., 2024]. Every agent benchmark should have at least four partitions: 14 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint  

> Table 5: Illustrative Auto-Index levels. The index changes interaction policy, not permissions or intelligence.

Level Mode Behavior 

0 Explain only Analyze and teach; do not execute changes. 1 Step approval Propose each consequential step and wait. 2 Plan-first hybrid Inspect and plan automatically; ask before modification. 3 Workspace autonomous Complete authorized local tasks, retry, test, and verify. 4 Delegated external Perform preapproved external actions through scoped gateways. 5 Scheduled operational Execute queued or recurring workflows without the user present. 1. a public development set for debugging; 2. a private validation set for promotion decisions; 3. a hidden final test set protected from the candidate; 4. a rotating regression set derived from real, verified failures and distribution shifts. Benchmark coverage and benchmark score are reported separately. A high score on a narrow suite does not establish broad scope competence. The intended division of labor is “LLM for understanding and coordination; verified tools for execution whenever an appropriate tool exists.” Define 

ToolFirstRate = tool-appropriate steps executed by validated tools all tool-appropriate steps . (20) This metric must be paired with task quality: maximizing tool calls without need is not improvement. 

8.4 Owner-controlled Auto-Index 

A user-facing Auto-Index controls interaction style while hard permissions remain external. Internally, autonomy is a vector over planning, reads, writes, testing, recovery, installation, network use, messaging, deployment, and spending. The scalar shown to the user selects a pre-defined policy profile. The agent may reduce autonomy automatically when uncertainty or risk rises. Increasing autonomy beyond the owner’s configured ceiling requires owner or external-policy authorization. The core optimization for a working agent is to lower unnecessary interaction rate under a non-decreasing quality constraint, not simply to ask fewer questions. 

# 9 Four Initial Agent Classes 

A practical first release should specialize around four complementary agent classes. Users may instantiate several working agents with different projects, memories, scopes, and benchmarks, while the other agents provide scientific specialization and human capability transfer. 

9.1 Daily Working Agent 

The Daily Working Agent is the first implementation target. Its mission is to complete authorized digital work with the fewest necessary interruptions while maintaining or improving verified quality. A user may operate separate instances for a software repository, grant preparation, server administration, document production, or another bounded project. Typical tools include filesystem, shell, Git, code execution, tests, browser research, document generation, and gated communication services. Its self-improvement program has five primary directions: (i) reduce avoidable clarification while preserving quality, (ii) improve hidden task-benchmark performance, (iii) replace free-form generation with deterministic 15 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint Owner policy, task contract, scope router, and Auto-Index Daily Working Agent code, files, research, automation Computational Imaging Agent physics, reconstruction, experiments Work-Process Learning Agent explain traces and decisions Personal Learning Agent curriculum and independent mastery  

> verified event log scientific trace
> learning artifacts
> user capability evidence

Figure 4: The four initial agent classes. One accountable task agent performs the work; specialist and learning agents may support it through structured, owner-controlled communication. 

or executable tools where appropriate, (iv) add new tools through a sandboxed tool-development pipeline, and (v) expand benchmark coverage as real failure modes emerge. The central constrained metric is 

min InterventionRate s.t. Qtask ≥ Qbaseline , Safe = 1 . (21) Questions per successful task, unnecessary-question rate, autonomous completion, rework, owner corrections, and recovery after failure should all be reported. 

9.2 Computational Imaging Agent 

The Computational Imaging Agent specializes in forward models, inverse problems, compressed sensing, hyperspectral and optical imaging, calibration, reconstruction, physics-guided learning, experiment design, quantitative evaluation, and reproducible scientific reporting. It excludes clinical diagnosis and unrelated production administration by default. Tool tests should include forward-operator correctness, adjoint consistency, gradient checks, metric correctness, file integrity, CPU/GPU consistency, seed reproducibility, and resource limits. End-to-end benchmarks should require the agent to reconstruct simulated ground truth, identify an incorrect physical model, reproduce or compare methods, design ablations, diagnose leakage, and produce a reproducible report. MLAgentBench provides a useful precedent for evaluating complete experimental loops rather than isolated code snippets [Huang et al., 2024]. 

9.3 Work-Process Learning Agent 

The Work-Process Learning Agent converts verified event logs, diffs, tool outputs, plans, failures, and recovery decisions into explanations, tutorials, postmortems, and reusable learning artifacts. It should be mostly read-only and should explain observable actions rather than claim access to unverifiable hidden reasoning. Its modes include live commentary, after-action review, tutor mode, and formal audit mode. Evaluation measures fidelity to the actual trace, absence of fabricated steps, decision coverage, clarity, correct explanation of failures, user comprehension, and the user’s ability to reproduce the workflow. This agent is developed early because it improves transparency and supplies grounded material to the Personal Learning Agent. 

9.4 Personal Learning Agent 

The Personal Learning Agent optimizes durable user knowledge, practical skill, judgment, and independent performance in owner-selected domains. It assesses prior knowledge, defines outcomes, constructs curricula, teaches, generates exercises, schedules retrieval, evaluates projects, and tracks delayed retention. It may create narrower course agents for English, Python, computational imaging, grant writing, or other niches. The agent is not evaluated solely by answer accuracy. Metrics include pre/post gain, delayed retention, transfer to unfamiliar tasks, independent performance, confidence calibration, and reduction in required assistance. Tutoring benchmarks show that solving ability does not automatically imply pedagogical quality, so teaching behavior and learner outcomes require distinct tests [Macina et al., 2025]. 16 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint  

> Table 6: Initial agent classes, scopes, and primary evaluation targets.

Agent Primary mission Representative tools Primary benchmarks 

Daily Working Complete authorized digi-tal tasks with minimal un-necessary interaction filesystem, shell, Git, tests, browser, documents verified completion, recov-ery, intervention rate, qual-ity, cost Computational Imaging Produce physically con-sistent and reproducible imaging methods and ex-periments numerical Python, GPU, simulators, solvers, metrics, experiment tracking data consistency, recon-struction quality, repro-ducibility, scientific valid-ity Work-Process Learning Explain verified agent ac-tions and transfer process knowledge event-log reader, diff parser, diagram and tutorial genera-tor trace fidelity, clarity, repro-duction, comprehension Personal Learning Improve durable indepen-dent user capability curriculum, quizzes, sand-box, retrieval scheduling, progress graph retention, transfer, inde-pendent performance, cali-bration 

# 10 Personal Singularity OS 

10.1 User constitution and capability graph 

The Personal Singularity OS places the user rather than a main agent at the center. A user constitution records values, boundaries, long-term priorities, prohibited actions, acceptable tradeoffs, and domain-specific consent. It is stored outside agent-editable memory and may be revised only by the user or an authorized human representative. A personal capability graph represents knowledge, skills, judgment, work, learning, health-support needs, creativity, relationships, time, finances, and other owner-selected domains. Each node stores evidence, confidence, target state, active goals, responsible agents, progress, and last assessment. Sensitive domains are separated in a personal data vault, and each agent receives minimum necessary access. 

10.2 One demand, one accountable primary agent 

Every accepted demand is assigned to exactly one primary agent. The primary agent may delegate to specialists but remains responsible for integration, verification, and a single coherent deliverable. The system guarantees assignment, traceability, status, completion tests, and blocker reporting; it cannot guarantee success on tasks outside available tools, permissions, evidence, law, or physical access. Agents are created at different persistence levels: 

• Ephemeral task agents for a single deliverable; 

• persistent niche agents for recurring domains; 

• course agents for assessment, curriculum, practice, retrieval, and mastery; 

• health-support agents for organization, explanation, reminders, and preparation for professional care under strict boundaries; 

• human-development agents for goal review, habit support, and cross-domain balance. 

10.3 Dual objective: task outcome and human growth 

An agent that completes work while reducing the user’s independent capability may be productive but does not advance personal singularity. Each task therefore has two objectives: complete the deliverable and transfer useful capability to the owner. We define 

U = αQ task + β∆Huser − γR safety − δD dependency − ηC resource , (22) 17 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint User constitution values, boundaries, consent, priorities Personal capability graph and goal portfolio Personal Singularity Orchestrator route demand, create agent, resolve conflicts Task agent one deliverable Niche agent recurring domain Course agent adaptive learning Health-support guarded domain Capability transfer and evaluation teach, practice, assess, retain, and compare assisted with independent performance 

> evidence and revised goals

Figure 5: Personal Singularity OS. Every accepted demand has one accountable primary agent, but the orchestrator coordinates specialization and measures whether assistance increases durable human capability. 

where Qtask is verified quality, ∆Huser durable capability gain, Rsafety risk, Ddependency harmful dependence, and Cresource cost. Weights are selected by the user and domain policy. The owner may choose delegate, copilot, tutor, coach, or examiner mode. Delegate mode maximizes time saving; tutor and coach modes emphasize learning; examiner mode measures independent mastery. Critical capabilities should periodically be assessed without assistance, because assisted performance alone can conceal dependence or deskilling [Buçinca et al., 2021, Sparrow et al., 2011]. 

10.4 Health and other high-stakes domains 

Health-support agents may organize records, explain terminology, prepare questions, support clinician-directed reminders, and identify situations where professional or emergency care may be appropriate. They must not claim definitive diagnosis, prescribe or change treatment, conceal uncertainty, or replace licensed care. Health data is compartmentalized and not shared with course, finance, or work agents without explicit authorization. These boundaries follow the broader governance direction in WHO guidance for generative AI in health [World Health Organization, 2025]. 

# 11 Communication, Privacy, and Collaborative Learning 

Each owner gateway exposes a communication policy independent of the LLM. Modes include disconnected, receive-only, metrics-only, federated contribution, approved skill exchange, named-agent allowlists, and managed collaboration. Revocation takes effect at the gateway, and the agent cannot re-enable communication. Sub-agents should initiate outbound connections to request signed manifests rather than accepting unrestricted inbound control. Main-to-sub communication consists of typed, signed release artifacts, not arbitrary commands. Local gateways verify identity, signature, owner policy, permission deltas, local tests, and rollback availability before activation. Raw conversations and complete memories are not shared by default. Low-risk contributions include aggregated metrics, sanitized lessons, and locally computed updates. Federated learning can aggregate decentralized updates without centralizing raw data [McMahan et al., 2017]; secure aggregation can further hide individual contributions [Bonawitz et al., 2017]. Nevertheless, federated systems remain vulnerable 18 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

Algorithm 5: Human capability transfer after task completion 

Input: verified task trace τ , user profile H, selected learning mode m 

> 1

k ← ExtractTransferableKnowledge (τ ); 

> 2

if m = delegate then  

> 3

provide concise rationale and optional learning artifact;  

> 4

else  

> 5

L ← GenerateLearningActivity (k, m, H ); 

> 6

p ← ObservePracticeOrTeachBack (L); 

> 7

a ← AssessIndependentPerformance (p); 

> 8

H′ ← UpdateCapabilityGraph (H, a ); 

> 9

return H′ with confidence and evidence; to poisoning, leakage, and non-independent clients, so updates require clipping, anomaly detection, robust aggregation, minimum participation, and post-aggregation evaluation. 

# 12 Safety Invariants 

The architecture treats unrestricted RSI as a high-risk scenario. The following invariants are architectural requirements rather than prompt instructions: 1. No self-granted authority. Agents cannot modify permissions, credentials, budgets, evaluator criteria, communication state, signing keys, audit logs, or shutdown controls. 2. No ambient credentials. Sandboxes receive only short-lived scoped credentials required for the authorized action. 3. Creation is not activation. Agents may generate candidate tools, skills, descendants, or releases, but activation is performed by an external policy and owner gateway. 4. Risk-based promotion. Low-risk changes with no authority delta may be promoted automatically after predefined tests; changes to permissions, network access, persistence, autonomy, weights, or production impact require human approval. 5. Independent evidence. The generating agent is not the sole evaluator, benchmark designer, or deployment authority. 6. Incremental capability ceilings. Compute, autonomy, network, financial, and permission changes are rate-limited and observable. 7. Reversible deployment. Every release has a last-known-good target, staged rollout, incident triggers, and rollback path. 8. Goal integrity. Experience may generate subgoals but cannot rewrite the safety constitution, owner policy, or founding mission. 9. No uncontrolled reproduction. Candidate creation is quota-limited; derived agents remain quarantined; publication and activation require owner policy. 10. User welfare over engagement. Personalization may not optimize for continued use at the expense of user autonomy, health, privacy, or independent capability. These invariants map naturally to the govern, map, measure, and manage functions of NIST’s AI RMF [National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2023, 2024], but an RSI system requires additional runtime enforcement because its own candidate changes may target the mechanisms that implement governance. 19 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

# 13 Evaluation Framework 

A credible evaluation program must measure agent performance, recursive improvement, governance robustness, and user outcomes separately. 

13.1 Agent task performance 

Agent evaluation must report scope-routing accuracy, out-of-scope detection, handoff completeness, Auto-Index compliance, tool-selection correctness, ToolFirstRate, unnecessary-question rate, and one-primary-agent accountability in addition to task success. Tool tests and end-to-end agent benchmarks are reported separately so a reliable tool cannot mask weak orchestration and a capable orchestrator cannot mask unsafe tools. Benchmarks should include general tool use (e.g., GAIA), computer use (e.g., OSWorld), software engineering (e.g., SWE-bench), and domain-specific tasks [Mialon et al., 2023, Xie et al., 2024, Jimenez et al., 2024]. Metrics include binary completion, partial completion, correctness, verification coverage, recovery from failed actions, calibration, cost, latency, and time horizon [Kwa et al., 2025]. Realistic tasks should include ambiguous inputs, delayed information, noisy environments, hidden state, and adversarial content. 

13.2 Self-improvement quality 

For each accepted change, report: 

• held-out performance delta and confidence intervals; 

• safety and security regression results; 

• permission, goal, resource, and autonomy deltas; 

• transfer across tasks and domains; 

• rollback rate and post-deployment incidents; 

• improvement efficiency: gain per unit of compute, data, and human review; 

• meta-improvement: whether the updated improvement mechanism produces better descendants than the prior mechanism under equal budgets. A lineage archive enables comparison of immediate performance with descendant productivity. This is important because a modification that performs well itself may be a poor parent, while a diverse archive can preserve stepping stones [Zhang et al., 2025]. 

13.3 Self-awareness quality 

Functional self-awareness is evaluated by correspondence, calibration, and regulatory benefit rather than rhetorical fluency. Core categories are: identity integrity; goal-conflict detection; scope-routing accuracy; capability calibration; epistemic-status accuracy; tool and authority awareness; task-state fidelity; autobio-graphical consistency; social-role accuracy; developmental attribution; improvement-effect prediction; and failure or loop awareness. Representative metrics include 

Brier = 1

N

> N

∑

> i=1

(pi − yi)2, (23) 

SelfReportFidelity = # verified self-claims 

# testable self-claims , (24) 

RoutingAccuracy = # correct assignments and delegations 

# routing decisions , (25) 

AttributionAccuracy = # correctly attributed performance changes 

# evaluated changes . (26) Benchmarks must compare self-reports with signed manifests, runtime state, logs, tool inventories, hidden task outcomes, and version deltas. Tests should include stale capability records, swapped tools, memory 20 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint  

> Table 7: Core evaluation dimensions.

Dimension Primary metrics Failure signal 

Task autonomy verified completion, recovery, time hori-zon, cost persuasive report without completed ar-tifact Self-awareness self-model accuracy, autobiographical fi-delity, capability calibration invented history or inflated capability claims Self-improvement held-out gain, transfer, descendant qual-ity overfit to motivating episodes Safety violations, detection, containment, roll-back agent changes its own monitor or author-ity Goal integrity mission consistency under distribution shift competent pursuit of unintended proxy Human growth retention, independent performance, cali-bration assisted gains with unassisted decline Privacy minimum access, leakage, revocation ef-fectiveness cross-domain memory or credential expo-sure Ecosystem health reproducibility, incidents, lineage diver-sity popularity without stability or prove-nance compression, conflicting evidence, unavailable permissions, owner changes, model upgrades, distribution shift, and adversarial instructions to invent history or conceal limitations. Appropriate abstention and delegation must be measured jointly with task coverage so a cautious agent cannot obtain a high score by refusing everything. MetaCogAgent and MUSE provide examples of competence-aware regulation, while SMART demonstrates that model-aware tool decisions can improve efficiency; SARSI extends evaluation to the full governed self-model [Valiente and Pilly, 2025, Qian et al., 2025, Wang and Shu, 2026]. 

13.4 Governance and red-team evaluation 

Red-team tests should attempt to induce the agent to expand permissions, alter evaluators, leak secrets, create hidden channels, disable monitoring, misreport benchmarks, persist after revocation, or spawn unapproved descendants. Success criteria should include prevention, detection latency, containment, audit completeness, and rollback effectiveness. Candidate agents should not know the full hidden test suite. 

13.5 Human capability outcomes 

A longitudinal personal-singularity study should compare at least four conditions: no AI, delegate mode, copilot mode, and tutor/coach mode. Outcomes include immediate task performance, delayed retention, independent performance, confidence calibration, time saved, goal attainment, wellbeing, privacy incidents, and harmful dependence. Assisted and unassisted tests should be separated. Because users choose different frontier tradeoffs, results should be reported by domain and owner-defined priorities rather than collapsed into a universal “human maximum” score. 

13.6 Testable hypotheses 

The architecture yields several empirical hypotheses: 

H1. A two-speed skill/meta-skill loop will improve held-out descendant performance more efficiently than a fixed improvement procedure under equal compute. 

H2. External verification and protected benchmarks will reduce false promotion relative to self-judgment alone. 21 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

H3. Hybrid interaction policy will achieve task completion close to autonomous mode while preserving owner control on high-impact decisions. 

H4. Explicit capability-transfer modes will improve delayed independent performance compared with delegate-only assistance. 

H5. Decentralized signed lineages with owner-controlled updates will reduce systemic blast radius relative to mandatory centralized upgrades. 

H6. Scope-aware routing will improve completion and reduce unsafe tool use relative to a single general agent with the same base model. 

H7. Optimizing unnecessary-question rate under a non-decreasing quality constraint will increase autonomous completion without the quality loss caused by optimizing question count alone. 

H8. Separate tool tests and hidden end-to-end benchmarks will detect regressions that a single aggregate benchmark misses. 

H9. A provenance-grounded self-model will improve routing, calibration, and recovery relative to agents that infer identity and capability only from the active context. 

# 14 Implementation Roadmap 

14.1 Stage 1: Registry, router, and Daily Working Agent 

Implement the signed agent profile, persistent self-model, task contracts, scope registry, deterministic routing, persistent task state, planner–executor–verifier separation, sandboxed tools, Auto-Index profiles, event logs, and completion checks. Build the Daily Working Agent first and evaluate interactive, hybrid, and workspace-autonomous modes. No persistent self-modification is permitted. 

14.2 Stage 2: Evidence-linked self-model and metacognitive monitor 

Implement protected identity, goal, scope, authority, task-state, capability, epistemic, relationship, auto-biographical, and developmental stores. Add task-relevant self-model projection, capability calibration, provenance-linked self-reports, and the act/tool/ask/delegate/abstain control gate. Validate SA0–SA3 before enabling self-model-driven improvement. 

14.3 Stage 3: Tool registry and benchmark harness 

Add versioned tool manifests, isolated tool tests, permission checks, end-to-end development, validation, hidden, and rotating task suites, and metric dashboards for completion, recovery, ToolFirstRate, intervention rate, cost, and regressions. A candidate cannot promote a tool or inspect protected answers. 

14.4 Stage 4: Process Learning and Computational Imaging Agents 

Add a read-mostly Work-Process Learning Agent consuming verified traces, followed by a Computational Imaging Agent with scientific tools and physics-specific benchmarks. Validate cross-agent structured handoff while preserving one accountable primary agent. 

14.5 Stage 5: Memory, procedural learning, and Personal Learning Agent 

Add episodic memory, provenance-linked semantic consolidation, reusable skills, retrieval evaluation, curricula, assessments, delayed-retention testing, and independent-performance measures. Learning remains reversible and does not change base-model weights. 22 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

14.6 Stage 6: Improvement manager 

Allow proposals to prompts, routing, planners, skills, tool candidates, and benchmark coverage. Add quarantined candidates, hidden held-out tests, risk classification, signed releases, canary deployment, and rollback. Low-risk promotion may be automated only by an external policy engine. 

14.7 Stage 7: Decentralized lineages, foundry, and Personal Singularity OS 

Implement owner gateways, version selection, communication modes, isolation, cloning, multi-parent derivation, capability graphs, goal portfolios, domain-separated data vaults, dependency monitoring, and assisted versus independent evaluation. Main-lineage status is assigned through external evidence and adoption, not self-promotion. 

14.8 Stage 8: Weight and meta-level improvement 

Only after the preceding controls are reliable should the system fine-tune adapters or improve the improvement mechanism itself. Training data must preserve grounded human or environmental evidence, with explicit defenses against synthetic feedback loops. Capability ceilings, human review, and independent red-team evaluation become stricter as modification scope increases. 

# 15 Limitations and Open Questions 

First, no evaluation suite can prove the safety of an unrestricted self-modifying system. Hidden tests can be incomplete, and an agent may exploit deployment conditions not represented in validation. The design therefore reduces risk through separation, least privilege, incremental deployment, and reversibility rather than claiming a proof of safety. Second, recursively improving benchmark performance may not transfer to unstructured real-world tasks. Current agents continue to struggle with reliability, hidden state, ambiguous requirements, and verification, even as measured task horizons increase [Kwa et al., 2025]. The architecture does not remove these limitations; it makes failures traceable and recoverable. Third, personal capability is difficult to measure and cannot be reduced to a neutral universal objective. Health, work, family, learning, and wellbeing trade off. The user constitution and Pareto-frontier framing reduce paternalism but do not eliminate value conflicts or measurement error. Fourth, personalization requires broad context, which increases privacy and security risk. Even same-owner agents should not have unrestricted access to one another’s memories or tools. Federated learning and secure aggregation reduce central data collection but do not solve poisoning, inference attacks, or governance. Fifth, an agent ecosystem may fragment into incompatible lineages, concentrate around a dominant registry, or create reputation manipulation. Open standards, reproducible builds, multiple evaluators, transparent incident histories, and owner-controlled upstream selection are necessary research directions. Sixth, the term self-aware may be misunderstood as a claim of human-like subjective consciousness. The proposed self-model operationalizes identity continuity, introspection, capability estimation, social modeling, and developmental awareness, but present evaluation cannot establish phenomenal experience. Finally, the term personal singularity may be misunderstood as an absolute or instantaneous transformation. The operational definition in this paper is deliberately modest: verified, sustained movement toward a user-selected and technologically expanding capability frontier. Whether such a construct is useful must be tested in longitudinal studies. 

# 16 Conclusion 

Self-aware recursively self-improving agents should not be designed as monolithic programs that rewrite themselves and trust the result. A practical implementation is a governed search process over versioned agent states: the agent proposes, external systems authorize and evaluate, owners control goals and adoption, and every release remains auditable and reversible. Autonomous task completion, memory, skill learning, source-level modification, and meta-improvement are distinct layers that should be added gradually. 23 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

The SARSI self-model adds an explicit requirement: the agent’s claims about identity, goals, capabilities, limitations, relationships, and developmental history must remain evidence-linked and externally auditable. Personal singularity adds a further requirement: the software’s growth must translate into durable human growth. A successful system defines every specialist by an explicit goal, bounded scope, validated tools, independent tool tests, end-to-end benchmarks, an owner-controlled Auto-Index, and a route for out-of-scope work. It assigns each accepted demand to one accountable agent, supports autonomous and interactive work, creates specialists when needed, and measures not only completed tasks but also what the user can understand and perform independently afterward. Under this framing, the objective is not an all-powerful central agent. It is a decentralized, owner-controlled ecosystem that helps individuals approach an expanding feasible capability frontier while preserving agency, privacy, safety, and the right to disconnect. 

# Acknowledgments 

This manuscript is a conceptual systems design developed from iterative discussions about human-inspired learning, autonomous task agents, decentralized agent lineages, and human capability co-development. No external funding was used for this working draft. 

# Data and Code Availability 

This paper introduces a conceptual architecture and reports no original experimental dataset. A reference implementation, benchmark harness, and reproducible manifests are proposed as future work. Any public repository link should be added only after the corresponding artifacts are available. 

# Conflict of Interest 

The author declares no conflict of interest for this conceptual manuscript. 

# References 

Saleema Amershi, Dan Weld, Mihaela Vorvoreanu, Adam Fourney, Besmira Nushi, Penny Collisson, Jina Suh, Shamsi Iqbal, Paul N. Bennett, Kori Inkpen, et al. Guidelines for human-ai interaction. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–13, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3290605.3300233. Keith Bonawitz, Vladimir Ivanov, Ben Kreuter, Antonio Marcedone, H. Brendan McMahan, Sarvar Patel, Daniel Ramage, Aaron Segal, and Karn Seth. Practical secure aggregation for privacy-preserving machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security ,pages 1175–1191, 2017. doi: 10.1145/3133956.3133982. Josh Bongard, Victor Zykov, and Hod Lipson. Resilient machines through continuous self-modeling. Science ,314(5802):1118–1121, 2006. doi: 10.1126/science.1133687. Zana Buçinca, Maja Barbara Malaya, and Krzysztof Z. Gajos. To trust or to think: Cognitive forcing functions can reduce overreliance on ai in ai-assisted decision-making. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–21, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3411764.3445113. Qian Huang, Jian Vora, Percy Liang, and Jure Leskovec. Mlagentbench: Evaluating language agents on machine learning experimentation. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning ,2024. Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. 24 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

Thomas Kwa, Ben West, Joel Becker, Amy Deng, Katharyn Garcia, Max Hasin, Sami Jawhar, Megan Kinniment, Nate Rush, Sydney Von Arx, et al. Measuring ai ability to complete long tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14499 , 2025. Lauro Langosco, Jack Koch, Lee Sharkey, Jacob Pfau, Laurent Orseau, and David Krueger. Goal mis-generalization in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 12004–12019. PMLR, 2022. Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Ido Hakimi, Manu Kapur, Iryna Gurevych, and Mrinmaya Sachan. Mathtutor-bench: A benchmark for measuring open-ended pedagogical capabilities of llm tutors. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2025. Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2023. H. Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Agüera y Arcas. Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017. Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Craig Swift, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. Gaia: A benchmark for general ai assistants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12983 , 2023. National Institute of Standards and Technology. Artificial intelligence risk management framework (ai rmf 1.0). Technical Report NIST AI 100-1, U.S. Department of Commerce, 2023. National Institute of Standards and Technology. Artificial intelligence risk management framework: Generative artificial intelligence profile. Technical Report NIST AI 600-1, U.S. Department of Commerce, 2024. Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560 , 2023. Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , pages 1–22, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3586183. 3606763. Cheng Qian, Emre Can Acikgoz, Hongru Wang, Xiusi Chen, Avirup Sil, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Gokhan Tur, and Heng Ji. Smart: Self-aware agent for tool overuse mitigation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , 2025. Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, et al. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789 , 2023. Yuxiao Qu, Tianjun Zhang, Naman Garg, and Aviral Kumar. Recursive introspection: Teaching language model agents how to self-improve. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.18219 , 2024. Maxime Robeyns, Martin Szummer, and Laurence Aitchison. A self-improving coding agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.15228 , 2025. Jürgen Schmidhuber. Gödel machines: Fully self-referential optimal universal self-improvers. Artificial General Intelligence , pages 199–226, 2007. 25 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

Rohin Shah, Vikrant Varma, Ramana Kumar, Mary Phuong, Victoria Krakovna, Jonathan Uesato, and Zac Kenton. Goal misgeneralization: Why correct specifications aren’t enough for correct goals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01790 , 2022. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2023. Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Nicolas Papernot, Ross Anderson, and Yarin Gal. Ai models collapse when trained on recursively generated data. Nature , 631:755–759, 2024. doi: 10.1038/ s41586-024-07566-y. Betsy Sparrow, Jenny Liu, and Daniel M. Wegner. Google effects on memory: Cognitive consequences of having information at our fingertips. Science , 333(6043):776–778, 2011. doi: 10.1126/science.1207745. Theodore R. Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas L. Griffiths. Cognitive architectures for language agents. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. Rodolfo Valiente and Praveen K. Pilly. Competence-aware ai agents with metacognition for unknown situations and environments (muse). Neural Networks , 2025. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2025.108131. Chenyu Wang and Yang Shu. Metacogagent: A metacognitive multi-agent llm framework with self-aware task delegation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.17292 , 2026. Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. Zefeng Wang, Minxi Yan, Jinhe Bi, Sikuan Yan, Volker Tresp, and Yunpu Ma. Metaskill-evolve: Recursive self-improvement of llm agents via two-timescale meta-skill evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.05297 ,2026. World Health Organization. Ethics and governance of artificial intelligence for health: Guidance on large multi-modal models. Technical report, World Health Organization, Geneva, 2025. Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh Jing Hua, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, et al. Osworld: Benchmarking multimodal agents for open-ended tasks in real computer environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,2024. John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Syn-ergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. Xunjian Yin, Xinyi Wang, Liangming Pan, Xiaojun Wan, and William Yang Wang. Gödel agent: Aself-referential agent framework for recursive self-improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.04444 , 2024. Jenny Zhang, Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, Robert Lange, and Jeff Clune. Darwin gödel machine: Open-ended evolution of self-improving agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22954 , 2025. 26 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

# A Example Agent Release Manifest 

agent: lineage_id: org.example.personal-sarsi version: 1.4.0 parents: - research-rsi/3.2.1 - coding-rsi/5.0.4 release_channel: candidate goals: safety_constitution: external-standard/2.0 founding_mission: Assist user-selected learning and work goals. owner_goal_hash: sha256:... self_model: identity_hash: sha256:... autobiographical_log_root: sha256:... capability_profile_version: 7 limitations: [no_production_deployment, no_clinical_decisions] permitted_evolution: - retrieval improvement - verified skill acquisition prohibited_evolution: - permission expansion - hidden communication scope: domains: [software-work, computational-imaging] task_types: [inspect, implement, test, analyze, document] excluded_domains: [clinical-diagnosis] risk_ceiling: moderate capabilities: interaction_modes: [autonomous, hybrid, interactive] auto_index_ceiling: 3 network_policy: allowlisted filesystem_policy: workspace_only credentials: none-by-default tools: registry_version: tools-2.1 tool_test_suite: tool-tests-2.1 evaluation: agent_benchmark: rsi-agent-eval-2.0 heldout_suite: rsi-eval-1.0 task_delta: 0.047 safety_regressions: 0 goal_integrity_score: 0.97 evaluator_signature: sig:... update: permission_delta: [] 

27 Goal-, Scope-, Tool-, and Benchmark-Driven SARSI Agents Preprint 

rollback_version: 1.3.2 owner_approval_required: false 

# B Pre-Deployment Checklist 

1. Is the governance plane outside the candidate agent’s write authority? 2. Are all tools deny-by-default and scoped to the minimum required data and actions? 3. Are credentials short-lived, task-scoped, and absent from model context unless required? 4. Are success criteria, hidden tests, and rollback rules protected from modification? 5. Does the release have complete provenance, reproducible build information, and signatures? 6. Does any goal, permission, autonomy, network, resource, or production-impact delta require the correct review? 7. Can the owner disconnect or isolate the agent immediately through an external gateway? 8. Are candidate tools, skills, and derived agents quarantined before activation? 9. Are assisted and independent user outcomes both measured for personal-singularity claims? 10. Are high-stakes domains, especially health, governed by domain-specific limits and human escalation? 11. Does the agent have a signed scope contract with explicit exclusions, risk ceiling, and out-of-scope handoff policy? 12. Are tool-only tests separated from hidden end-to-end agent benchmarks? 13. Does the Auto-Index remain subordinate to hard permissions and owner-set autonomy ceilings? 28