Title: SkillPyramid: A Hierarchical Skill Consolidation Framework for Self-Evolving Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.03692v1

Published Time: Wed, 03 Jun 2026 01:16:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# SKILL PYRAMID : A Hierarchical Skill Consolidation Framework for Self-Evolving Agents 

Yuan Xiong 1,2 * Miao Ziqi 3* Chen Qian 3 Lijun Li 3

Yequan Wang 4 Shizhu He 1,2,4† Jun Zhao 1,2 Kang Liu 1,2 1The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 

> 2

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 

> 3

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China 

> 4

Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China 

{shizhu.he,jzhao,kliu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn 

Abstract 

Recent AI agents can flexibly invoke skills to solve complex tasks, but their long-term im-provement is fundamentally constrained by a lack of systematic skill construction, accumula-tion, and transfer. In particular, without a uni-fied framework for skill consolidation, agents tend to redundantly construct similar capabili-ties across different tasks, are unable to effec-tively transform experience into reusable assets, and struggle to generalize task-specific skills to novel scenarios. To address this limitation, we propose S KILL PYRAMID , a skill consolidation framework that reuses existing skill experience for broader task generalization. Operating on a hierarchical skill topology, S KILL PYRAMID 

further introduces a self-evolution mechanism that enables agents to compose, validate, and incorporate new skills during task execution. Experiments on ALFWorld, WebShop, and Sci-enceWorld across four backbone models show that S KILL PYRAMID substantially increases the average reward by 38.0% and reduces ex-ecution steps by 27.7%. Overall, our method transforms a skill collection from a static re-source pool into a dynamic evolution system. 

1 Introduction 

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have shifted agent systems from passive response generation to autonomous task completion (Yao et al., 2022b; Shinn et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a). Within this shift, skills —callable units of capa-bility—have become a key substrate for agents’ problem solving, substantially improving perfor-mance on complex, long-horizon, and open-ended tasks (Wang et al., 2023a; Liang et al., 2026; Wang 

> *

Equal contribution. 

> †

Corresponding author. (a) Agent with Flat skill library 

(b) Agent with S KILL PYRAMID      

> New Task
> New Task
> Isolated skills repeat experience and
> transfer poorly.
> Existing Skill 1 Existing Skill 2 Existing Skill 3
> …
> New Skill 1 Extracting experience from
> existing skills for new tasks
> No matching skill found. Agent must explore on its own.

Figure 1: Flat skill library vs. S KILL PYRAMID . (a) With isolated skills, no match is found for an unseen task and the agent must explore from scratch, often failing. (b) SKILL PYRAMID composes new skills by recombining components of existing ones. 

et al., 2026; Mi et al., 2026). In open-ended en-vironments, however, manually curated skill sets quickly grow stale, and continual skill evolution becomes essential for sustained competence. Yet a central question remains open: how can skills evolve from isolated, task-specific solutions into reusable, compositional knowledge? Existing approaches tackle parts of this ques-tion from different angles. Tool-augmented agents extend LLMs with external APIs to fill capability gaps (Schick et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024), and modular frameworks coordinate specialized com-ponents through task decomposition (Karpas et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023). A re-lated line learns reusable skills via program syn-thesis or experiential accumulation (Liang et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024; Fang et al., 2025). More 1

> arXiv:2606.03692v1 [cs.AI] 2 Jun 2026

recently, dedicated skill-management frameworks have emerged (Liang et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2026; Mi et al., 2026), demonstrating the value of creat-ing, organizing, retrieving, and refining reusable skill units. Yet two limitations remain: (i) exist-ing skills are typically reused as stored units, leav-ing their internal transferable experience underex-ploited; and (ii) new skills are often retrieved, re-fined, or appended rather than composed from prior skill experience. This motivates a different perspective: a grow-ing, structured skill library in which the experience captured by existing skills generalizes effectively to tasks beyond their original scope. As illustrated in Figure 1, related skills often share underlying capabilities, and treating these as atomic compo-nents lets agents recombine them to address unseen tasks, turning a flat collection into a structure that supports both reuse and generalization. Building on this view, we propose S KILL PYRA -

> MID

, an evolving skill framework for LLM agents. SKILL PYRAMID organizes skills into a multi-level hierarchy in which lower levels hold fine-grained, reusable atomic capabilities and upper levels abstract recurring problem-solving patterns. A Relation Analyzer and a Relation Builder iden-tify reusable relations and construct this hierar-chy through Downward Atomic Extraction , which captures minimal reusable capabilities, and Up-ward Abstract Induction , which summarizes com-mon problem-solving patterns. A task-driven self-evolution mechanism then folds each validated new skill back into the hierarchy by linking it to related skills, yielding a dynamic capability system that expands over time, reduces redundancy, and accu-mulates reusable knowledge. Our contributions are as follows: • We propose S KILL PYRAMID , a framework that organizes agent skills into a growing hi-erarchy and improves transferability through explicit reuse and dependency modeling. • We design a pyramid organization mecha-nism with a Relation Analyzer and a Relation Builder, constructing atomic skills via down-ward extraction and abstract skills via upward induction. • We introduce a task-driven self-evolution mechanism that retrieves, composes, and gen-erates skills while incrementally updating SKILL PYRAMID . Experiments on ALFWorld, WebShop, and ScienceWorld show 38.0% higher average reward and 27.7% fewer inter-action steps across multiple backbone LLMs. 

2 Method 

Our method improves the generalization of a fixed skill collection by leveraging reusable patterns from existing high-quality skills. To this end, we construct a pyramidal, reusable, and continuously evolving skill system, where successful skills serve as reusable building blocks for related tasks rather than isolated modules. As illustrated in Figure 2, the system is managed by a multi-agent frame-work, following prior agent and tool-orchestration paradigms (Karpas et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024; Xiong et al., 2025), that analyzes the existing skill library (§2.2.1), con-structs reuse relations among skills (§2.2.2), synthe-sizes new skills grounded in the resulting hierarchy (§2.3), and incrementally evolves as new skills are added (§2.4). 

2.1 Problem Formalization 

We consider an interactive agent setting where an agent receives a natural language task instruction 

x, interacts with an environment through actions, and receives task feedback after execution. At each step t, the agent observes the environment state 

ot, takes an action at, and obtains a final reward 

r ∈ [0 , 1] or a task completion signal after the episode ends. A complete task trajectory is denoted as τ = ( x, o 0, a 0, o 1, . . . , a T , o T +1 , r ).A skill s is defined as a structured natural lan-guage program s = ( n, d, c ), where n is the skill name, d is a short description, and c is the skill con-tent specifying its applicable conditions, execution procedure, and inputs/outputs. Unlike methods that directly treat trajectories as training data for parameter updates, S KILL PYRA - 

> MID

converts task experience and existing skill de-scriptions into explicit, reusable skills. Given a skill collection S = {s1, s 2, . . . , s N }, our goal is to con-struct and maintain a hierarchical S KILL PYRAMID 

P = {L0, L 1, . . . , L K } (illustrated in Figure 2), where skills become increasingly abstract and com-positional from the bottom layer L0 to the top layer 

LK . For a stream of tasks, S KILL PYRAMID aims to improve task performance by reusing, compos-ing, and evolving skills. 2s1 : find apple → take apple → clean → place            

> s2 : find potato →take potato →heat →place
> s3 : find tomato →take tomato →cool →place

Relation Analyzer        

> 𝑆 ={𝑠 !,𝑠 ",…,𝑠 #}Flat skill library:
> Coarse
> Grouping

……                 

> Fine -grained relation analysis :
> Relation Type 𝝉 𝒌 Evidence 𝒆 𝒌
> Downward Atomic
> Extraction
> “shared steps: find
> object →take object ”
> Upward Abstract
> Induction
> “shared schema: acquire
> →transform →place ”
> 𝐷 $=𝑔 %,𝜏 %,𝑒 %%
> Downward Atomic Extraction :
> Upward Abstract Induction :
> 𝑔 !
> 𝑔 "

……                                              

> 𝑎 %=𝐵 &'($ 𝑔 %
> 𝑢 %=𝐵 &)* 𝑔 %
> atomic skill
> rewrite
> s1’ : find object →take object
> →clean →place
> s1 : find apple →take apple
> →clean →place
> acquire object →transform state
> →verify →place object
> 𝑔 "
> 𝑔 #
> abstract
> skill
> Skill Creator New task x:cool apple
> and place in cabinet ?
> 𝑎 !
> 𝑢 !
> Retrieve
> 𝑅 𝑥 ⊆𝑆 𝑎 !𝑢 !𝑠 !
> +𝑠 ,
> +…
> Skill pyramid
> New skill: ̂𝑠 =𝐶 $%&'(& 𝑥 ,{𝑎 ",𝑢 ",𝑠 "
> ),𝑠 *
> )},𝑃
> [reuse a1 ]→cool apple →verify
> cooled →place in cabinet
> Higher level,
> more abstract

Relation Builder                   

> New skill: ̂𝑠
> Analyzer
> 𝛥 𝑃 '={̂𝑠 →𝑎 !,𝑢 !→̂𝑠 }
> New relations Relation Builder
> 𝑃 +,"=Update 𝑃 +,̂𝑠 ,𝛥 𝑃 +

…

…

Self Evolving 

…… …… 

…… …… 

𝑳 𝒌 

𝑳 𝟎   

> Lower level,
> more atomic
> Potentially related
> existing skills New pyramid

Figure 2: Overview of the proposed S KILL PYRAMID framework. The system analyzes an existing skill library, constructs downward atomic and upward abstract reuse relations, organizes skills into a hierarchical pyramid, creates skills from the pyramid, and incrementally evolves the pyramid as new skills are added. 

2.2 SKILL PYRAMID Construction 

To construct the pyramid, we employ two agents: a Relation Analyzer and a Relation Builder. The An-alyzer identifies related skill groups, specifies the relation type for each, and dispatches the relation-construction tasks to the Builder. The Builder then extracts atomic skills, induces abstract skills, and rewrites the original skills. The Analyzer–Builder pipeline iterates until no new skill is produced or a maximum of T rounds is reached, with each round’s outputs feeding the next. 

2.2.1 Relation Analyzer 

Given the current skill collection S = {si}Ni=1 ,directly analyzing all skills jointly may introduce substantial noise and lead to an excessive analy-sis workload. We therefore adopt a progressive analysis strategy that proceeds from coarse to fine granularity. 

Coarse Grouping. Let ni and di denote the name and description of skill si, respectively. The Rela-tion Analyzer first performs a coarse grouping by inspecting only these two fields: 

G0 = Ac

 {(ni, d i)}Ni=1 

 , (1) where Ac denotes the coarse-grained analyzer and 

G0 = {G01, . . . , G 0

M } is the resulting set of coarse skill groups. Each group G0

m ⊆ S collects skills whose names and descriptions suggest potential relatedness in terms of functionality, task scope, or reuse potential. We use G0

m to refer interchange-ably to this subset of skills and to its index set. 

Fine-Grained Group Analysis. The Relation Analyzer then analyzes each coarse group G0

m in parallel, with tools to inspect the full structured content of every skill in the group. For each G0

m, a 

fine-grained analyzer Af runs for at most t rounds and produces a set of relation-construction assign-ments: 

Dm = Af (G0

m) = {(gk, τ k, e k)}k, (2) where each gk ⊆ G0

m is a fine-grained skill sub-set, τk specifies its relation type , and ek provides natural-language rationale and construction guid-ance. A single coarse group may yield multiple such subsets. The assignments from all coarse groups, D = S

m Dm, are then dispatched to Rela-tion Builder for actual reuse-relation construction. 

2.2.2 Relation Builder 

To capture reuse at both the execution level and the task-structure level, the Relation Builder oper-ates in two complementary modes depending on 

τk: Downward Atomic Extraction , which surfaces shared low-level capabilities, and Upward Abstract Induction , which summarizes shared high-level pat-terns. It takes the assignments produced by the Relation Analyzer as input and constructs the cor-responding reuse relations among existing skills. 

Downward Atomic Extraction. An atomic skill captures a minimal reusable capability that appears across multiple skills. Compared with concrete task skills, atomic skills are less tied to a specific 3task instance and can be reused across different environments or task categories. For each assignment (gk, τ k, e k) ∈ D with 

τk = Downward Atomic Extraction , let gk =

{s1, . . . , s m}. The Relation Builder extracts the common functional component shared by these skills as an atomic skill: 

ak = Batom (gk). (3) Following the unified skill representation in §2.1, 

ak takes the same form (nk, d k, c k) as any other skill, where dk summarizes the common goal of the shared capability. To record explicit reuse relations introduced by the pyramid, we augment each skill with a dependency field δ that stores references to other skills it reuses. After ak is extracted, each original skill si ∈ gk is rewritten to invoke ak

through an explicit reuse reference: 

s′ 

> i

= Rewrite( si, ρ (ak)) , si ∈ gk, (4) where the reuse reference ρ(ak) = ( nk, q k, w k, o k)

records the reused skill’s name nk, a unique iden-tifier qk, the condition wk under which it should be reused, and the capability ok it provides. This reference is appended to the dependency field δi of 

s′ 

> i

as a structured reuse statement. If an existing skill is already fully covered by other skills, the Relation Builder directly treats this covered skill as the reusable module and updates the covering skills to reference it. To further reduce redundancy, highly similar extracted atomic skills are merged into a single canonical skill. The extracted atomic skill ak is placed one layer below the source skills in the pyramid: 

ℓ(ak) = min 

> s∈gk

ℓ(s) − 1, (5) where ℓ(·) denotes the layer index of a skill. 

Upward Abstract Induction. While atomic skills capture reusable low-level capabilities, a group of skills may also share similar high-level functional structures. For each assignment (gk, τ k, e k) ∈ D with τk =

Upward Abstract Induction , the Relation Builder induces an abstract skill uk that summarizes the common solving pattern of gk:

uk = Babs (gk). (6) The induced uk takes the same form (nk, d k, c k)

as in §2.1, with its dependency field δk record-ing references to the lower-level skills in gk that it composes. Unlike atomic skills, which focus on reusable operations, abstract skills focus on gener-alizable task structures: they describe how lower-level skills should be organized to solve a class of related tasks, rather than specifying only concrete execution steps. The induced abstract skill uk is placed one layer above the source skills in the pyramid: 

ℓ(uk) = max 

> s∈gk

ℓ(s) + 1 . (7) In this way, uk serves as higher-level guidance, while the referenced concrete or atomic skills pro-vide executable support for its realization. 

2.3 Skill Creation 

While the pyramid built so far organizes existing skills into reusable structures, a new task often does not match any single skill exactly and instead requires composing several. To turn the pyramid from a passive repository into an active problem solver, we introduce a task-driven Skill Creator agent that generates new skills by composing rele-vant components from the existing hierarchy rather than synthesizing them from scratch. Given a task instruction x, the Skill Creator retrieves relevant skills from the current S KILL PYRAMID , analyzes how they can support the task, and synthesizes a new skill grounded in the existing hierarchy. Specifically, the Skill Creator retrieves a candidate set R(x) ⊆ S by jointly considering task seman-tics, applicable conditions, and the constraints en-coded in the pyramid. Based on R(x), the Skill Creator generates a new skill in two stages: (i) framework construction ,where higher-level (abstract) skills are prioritized to outline the task structure and high-level solving logic; (ii) detail instantiation , where lower-level (atomic) skills are prioritized to fill in executable operations, inputs, checks, and outputs. If an ex-isting skill fully covers the task, the Skill Creator directly reuses it. Otherwise, it composes a new task-specific skill: 

ˆs = Ccreate (x, R(x), P) , (8) where P denotes the current pyramid, which en-codes both the layer structure and the reuse rela-tions among skills. The generated skill follows the same structured format as existing skills. 

2.4 Self-Evolution 

A static skill library cannot keep pace with the open-ended stream of tasks that an agent encoun-4ters during deployment. To make S KILL PYRAMID 

continually adaptive, we introduce an incremental self-evolution mechanism that absorbs each newly created skill into the existing hierarchy without rebuilding it from scratch. At iteration t, the system maintains a skill collec-tion St and a pyramid structure Pt, which encodes both the layer assignment and the reuse relations among skills in St. Given a newly created skill ˆs,the goal of self-evolution is to update Pt by con-necting ˆs with relevant prior skills. Unlike the initial construction stage, the Relation Analyzer does not re-analyze the whole skill library. Instead, it treats ˆs as a query skill, retrieves only potentially related existing skills, and dispatches the corresponding relation-construction tasks to the Relation Builder. The Relation Builder then follows the same pro-cedure as in §2.2.2 to construct new reuse relations involving ˆs. The resulting updates, denoted ∆Pt,are incrementally inserted into the pyramid: 

Pt+1 = Update( Pt, ˆs, ∆Pt) . (9) This procedure allows S KILL PYRAMID to absorb new skills incrementally while preserving its exist-ing hierarchical organization. 

3 Experiment 

3.1 Setup Benchmarks. We evaluate our method on three challenging benchmarks: ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2020), ScienceWorld (Wang et al., 2022), and WebShop (Yao et al., 2022a). ALFWorld is a text-based environment that aligns embodied house-hold tasks with their abstract textual counterparts. ScienceWorld is an interactive text environment in which agents must complete elementary-school-level science experiments. WebShop simulates a real-world e-commerce website in which agents are required to navigate, search, and purchase products. Further details on each benchmark are provided in Appendix A.1. 

Baselines. We compare our approach against four baselines: ReAct (Yao et al., 2022b), Re-flexion (Shinn et al., 2023), ExpeL (Zhao et al., 2024), and ReAct+Skills. ReAct interleaves chain-of-thought reasoning with environment actions. Re-flexion and ExpeL are experience-based methods that reflect on past trajectories to guide future de-cisions. The ReAct+Skills baseline and our pro-posed S KILL PYRAMID method have access to the same initial skill library, ensuring a fair compari-son. Further details on each baseline are provided in Appendix A.2. 

Models. We evaluate all methods on a set of representative large language models, including DeepSeek-V3.2 (Liu et al., 2025), GPT-4.1 (Ope-nAI, 2025), Gemini 2.5 Pro (Comanici et al., 2025), and Qwen3-235B (Yang et al., 2025). To ensure de-terministic and reproducible outputs, the sampling temperature is set to 0 for all models. 

3.2 Main Results 

We conduct comprehensive experiments on ALF-World, WebShop, and ScienceWorld with four rep-resentative backbone models. The overall results are summarized in Table 1. We report both task reward / success rate (R) and the average number of interaction steps (S), where higher reward and fewer steps indicate better agent performance. 

SKILL PYRAMID improves performance and generalization. Across different environments and backbone models, S KILL PYRAMID achieves the best overall results among all evaluated meth-ods. Averaged over all reward metrics in Ta-ble 1, S KILL PYRAMID obtains an average reward of 73 .7, outperforming ReAct ( 53 .4), Reflexion (59 .6), ExpeL ( 61 .3), and ReAct+Skills ( 65 .8). Since ReAct+Skills and S KILL PYRAMID are pro-vided with the same initial skill library, this im-provement shows that the gain does not merely come from access to additional skills, but from organizing skills into a reusable pyramidal struc-ture. This advantage is especially clear on unseen tasks, where S KILL PYRAMID achieves an average unseen-task reward of 84 .8, substantially higher than ReAct+Skills ( 73 .9), ExpeL ( 68 .2), Reflex-ion ( 64 .8), and ReAct ( 58 .1). These results sug-gest that the atomic and abstract skills induced by SKILL PYRAMID capture transferable task-solving knowledge and enable stronger generalization to novel task instances. 

SKILL PYRAMID improves interaction efficiency. 

In addition to improving task reward, S KILL PYRA - 

> MID

also reduces the average number of interaction steps. Across all step metrics, S KILL PYRAMID 

uses only 14 .6 steps on average, compared with 

20 .2 for ReAct, 18 .5 for Reflexion, 17 .4 for ExpeL, and 17 .7 for ReAct+Skills. This efficiency gain is particularly evident on ALFWorld: for example, on DeepSeek-V3.2, S KILL PYRAMID reduces the 5Model Method ALFWorld WebShop ScienceWorld Seen Unseen Seen Seen Unseen R↑ S↓ R↑ S↓ R↑ S↓ R↑ S↓ R↑ S↓

DeepSeek-V3.2 ReAct 66.4 19.5 69.4 19.3 31.6 24.1 69.9 17.6 64.7 19.3 Reflexion 70.1 18.2 73.6 18.0 35.3 22.4 72.4 16.3 67.8 17.9 ExpeL 67.9 18.9 76.1 17.4 29.2 24.0 74.9 16.0 74.1 17.5 ReAct + Skills 75.7 15.6 80.6 14.7 27.0 25.1 71.6 15.9 68.5 16.6 

SKILL PYRAMID (Ours) 81.4 10.7 84.8 10.6 32.0 23.9 76.3 16.7 79.1 17.0 GPT-4.1 ReAct 58.6 20.1 56.1 20.4 30.4 21.8 57.4 19.1 52.3 20.2 Reflexion 64.2 18.5 62.8 18.6 34.6 20.1 66.8 17.0 61.6 18.2 ExpeL 65.7 17.6 64.8 17.4 32.6 18.7 72.1 14.4 66.8 15.6 ReAct + Skills 70.7 16.4 75.8 16.2 38.5 22.1 78.6 17.6 71.8 18.6 SKILL PYRAMID (Ours) 77.1 15.1 85.1 13.1 42.5 15.3 86.6 15.2 88.6 14.2 

Gemini 2.5 Pro ReAct 60.0 18.7 61.9 19.2 31.7 22.1 58.2 18.4 56.1 19.1 Reflexion 67.2 17.3 69.4 17.7 38.2 19.9 66.8 16.9 63.2 17.5 ExpeL 68.6 17.9 70.2 17.0 33.1 19.3 72.8 15.0 67.4 14.9 ReAct + Skills 75.0 17.0 73.9 16.7 33.0 18.7 77.3 16.7 79.1 17.0 SKILL PYRAMID (Ours) 73.6 16.0 80.6 11.9 35.0 18.2 89.7 9.0 82.9 14.3 

Qwen3-235B ReAct 55.4 20.5 53.8 21.0 28.6 22.4 54.8 19.6 50.6 20.8 Reflexion 61.8 19.0 60.2 19.5 32.4 20.6 63.6 17.7 59.4 18.9 ExpeL 63.2 18.2 62.4 17.8 30.8 19.2 69.4 15.3 63.8 16.2 ReAct + Skills 71.4 17.3 68.6 18.3 31.0 22.2 74.2 15.5 73.0 15.9 SKILL PYRAMID (Ours) 77.1 13.7 91.0 11.0 38.0 18.4 85.6 14.0 86.3 14.3    

> Table 1: Main results across ALFWorld, WebShop, and ScienceWorld. R denotes reward / success rate ( ↑higher is better); S denotes the average number of interaction steps ( ↓lower is better). The best result for each metric within each model is shown in bold , and the second-best is underlined.

number of steps from 15 .6 to 10 .7 on seen tasks and from 14 .7 to 10 .6 on unseen tasks compared with ReAct+Skills. On Qwen3-235B, it further re-duces the steps from 17 .3 to 13 .7 on ALFWorld seen tasks and from 18 .3 to 11 .0 on unseen tasks. These results indicate that hierarchical skill reuse helps agents reach successful states through shorter and more targeted action sequences. 

4 Analysis 

In this section, we further analyze the contribution of each component in S KILL PYRAMID . We fo-cus on two questions: whether downward atomic extraction, upward abstract induction, and task-driven self-evolution are necessary for the final performance gain, and how self-evolution affects agent performance as the skill system is gradually updated. 

Component Contribution. To evaluate the con-tribution of each component in S KILL PYRAMID ,we conduct ablation experiments on ALFWorld and ScienceWorld with DeepSeek-V3.2 as the back-bone (Table 2). We consider four ablated variants: (i) w/o atomic skills , in which Downward Atomic Extraction is disabled so that no atomic skills are produced and source skills retain their original form; (ii) w/o abstract skills , in which Upward Abstract Induction is disabled so that no higher-level guidance is induced; (iii) w/o self-evolution ,in which the pyramid is frozen after initial construc-tion and newly created skills are not folded back; and (iv) w/ scratch-generated skills , in which the Skill Creator generates new skills without retriev-ing or reusing skills from the pyramid. As reference baselines, we also report vanilla R EACT without external skills and R EACT W / FLAT SKILLS , which uses the same initial skill collection but without pyramidal organization. Removing atomic skills drops the average reward from 81 .4 → 78 .6 on ALFWorld and 76 .3 → 75 .3 on ScienceWorld, while removing abstract skills yields 81 .4 → 80 .0

6Method ALFWorld ScienceWorld                

> Baselines
> REACT 66.4 69.9 REACT w/ flat skills 75.7 71.6
> Ablations
> w/o Atomic Skills 78.6 75.3 w/o Abstract Skills 80.0 71.1 w/o Self-evolution 76.4 73.7 w/ Scratch-generated Skills 64.3 70.1
> Full method
> SKILL PYRAMID 81.4 76.3

Table 2: Ablation results on ALFWorld and Science-World using DeepSeek-V3.2 as the backbone model. 

and 76 .3 → 71 .1, respectively. This asymmetry sug-gests that atomic skills mainly help on benchmarks rich in reusable low-level operations, whereas ab-stract skills are more critical for multi-step proce-dural composition—a point we revisit in §5. Freez-ing the pyramid further reduces performance to 

76 .4/73 .7, confirming that incremental incorpora-tion of new skills is needed for sustained adaptation. Most strikingly, scratch-generation collapses the reward to 64 .3/70 .1, falling below the flat-skill baseline ( 75 .7 on ALFWorld) and indicating that ungrounded synthesis injects more noise than ben-efit. Overall, every component contributes, and grounding new skills in the existing hierarchy is essential for reliable skill synthesis. 

Effect of Self-Evolution. We further analyze how self-evolution affects performance as the skill system is updated over incoming tasks. Figure 3 compares the full S KILL PYRAMID with three vari-ants: a static version without skill updates, an append-only version without consolidation, and a from-scratch version that generates new skills with-out reusing the pyramid. The full S KILL PYRAMID 

maintains the most stable late-stage performance and gradually converges to a high success rate. In contrast, the static variant performs well at early stages but degrades over time, suggesting that a fixed skill system cannot continuously adapt to new tasks. Append-only evolution also achieves competitive performance in the middle stage, but its performance becomes less stable as redundant and weakly organized skills accumulate. The from-scratch variant remains substantially worse, show-ing that grounding new skills in the existing pyra-mid is important for reliable skill generation. Over-all, these results indicate that self-evolution is most effective when newly generated skills are reused through the hierarchical pyramid rather than simply 

Figure 3: Self-evolution learning curves over incoming tasks on the ALFWorld seen split, obtained using the DeepSeek-V3.2. The full S KILL PYRAMID maintains stronger and more stable late-stage performance than static, append-only, and from-scratch variants. 

appended or generated independently. 

5 Discussion 

The results suggest that the effectiveness of SKILL PYRAMID comes not only from exposing agents to external skills, but from reorganizing these skills into reusable low-level components and high-level procedural guidance. We further discuss two questions: how atomic and abstract skills contribute differently, and whether hierarchi-cal consolidation remains useful when scaling to noisy web-mined skills. 

Why Do Atomic and Abstract Skills Help? To avoid post-hoc grouping, we partition tasks before 

the ablations using action statistics from oracle trajectories. For each task x, define the low-level action mass 

mlow (x) = 1

> Tx
> Tx

X

> t=1

I[at ∈ A low ],

where Alow collects reusable primitives ( naviga-tion , search , pick , put , open , use , observe , mea-sure ), and let ℓdep (x) be the longest ordered depen-dency chain over state-changing or diagnostic mo-tifs (e.g., clean-then-place , heat-then-place , test-then-observe , measure-then-compare ). Using the empirical quartiles Q1, Q 3 of each statistic over the evaluation set, we label x as atomic-heavy 

if mlow (x) ≥ Q3(mlow ) and ℓdep (x) ≤ Q1(ℓdep ),and as abstract-heavy if mlow (x) ≤ Q1(mlow ) and 

ℓdep (x) ≥ Q3(ℓdep ); tasks in neither extreme are discarded as ambiguous. Table 3 shows an asym-metric pattern: removing atomic skills degrades atomic-heavy tasks more, whereas removing ab-stract skills disproportionately hurts abstract-heavy 7Task Group #Tasks mlow ℓdep Full w/o Atomic w/o Abstract                 

> Atomic-heavy 184 0.93 1.96 82.6 76.1 (−6.5) 80.2 (−2.4)
> Abstract-heavy 147 0.43 5.14 78.9 76.8 (−2.1) 70.9 (−8.0)

Table 3: Action-based task grouping and ablation results. 

mlow and ℓdep denote atomicity and dependency depth. Parentheses indicate drops from full S KILL PYRAMID .                        

> Setting Level 1 Level 2 Overall Acc. ↑/ Step ↓Acc. ↑/ Step ↓Acc. ↑/ Step ↓
> No Web Skills 57.8 / 5.6 43.3 / 4.7 52.0 / 5.2 Flat Web Skills 62.2 / 5.3 46.7 / 6.8 56.0 / 5.9 SKILL PYRAMID Web Skills 68.9 /4.5 53.3 / 5.3 62.7 /4.8

Table 4: Performance of web-mined skills on GAIA-Lite, a 75-task subset of GAIA covering Level 1 and Level 2 tasks. Acc. denotes exact-match accuracy, and Step denotes the average number of steps. 

tasks. This supports our hypothesis that atomic skills primarily provide reusable execution, while abstract skills drive high-level decomposition and the composition of lower-level skills. 

Pyramidal Consolidation Improves Web-Mined Skills. To examine whether S KILL PYRAMID re-mains useful beyond benchmark-specific skill li-braries, we evaluate web-mined skills on GAIA-Lite, a lightweight 75-task subset sampled from the public validation split of GAIA (Mialon et al., 2024). Starting from 150K web-mined candidate skills, we retain 2,271 high-quality skills and com-pare three settings: no web skills, flat web skills, and the same web skills organized by S KILL PYRA -

> MID

. As shown in Table 4, flat web skills al-ready improve over the no-skill baseline, while SKILL PYRAMID Web Skills further achieve higher accuracy and fewer execution steps on both Level 1 and Level 2 tasks. This indicates that the gain comes not only from acquiring more skills, but from consolidating noisy web-mined skills into a pyramidal structure with atomic operations, ab-stract task schemas, and explicit reuse relations. 

6 Related Work 

LLM agents and experience reuse. LLM agents have made substantial progress on long-horizon in-teractive tasks by interleaving reasoning, action, and experience reuse (Yao et al., 2022b; Shinn et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024; Schick et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024). Existing methods can be broadly grouped into reasoning–action cou-pling, experience-driven self-improvement, and tool-augmented orchestration. ReAct interleaves verbal reasoning with environment actions to sup-port sequential decision making (Yao et al., 2022b). Building on this paradigm, Reflexion accumulates verbal self-reflection across episodes to refine fu-ture trials (Shinn et al., 2023), while ExpeL consol-idates cross-task experiential insights to bootstrap unseen tasks (Zhao et al., 2024). Beyond pure reasoning, another line augments agents with ex-ternal tools and expert modules: MRKL connects language models with symbolic reasoners through modular routing (Karpas et al., 2022), and Tool-former learns API invocation from self-supervised demonstrations (Schick et al., 2023). Subsequent work scales this paradigm through expert-model or-chestration (Shen et al., 2023), plug-and-play tool composition (Lu et al., 2023), and large-scale API use (Qin et al., 2024). 

Skill organization and evolution. Reusable skills have emerged as an essential substrate for long-horizon agent learning, allowing agents to consolidate interaction experience into transferable capabilities (Liang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a, 2026; Mi et al., 2026; Fang et al., 2025). Existing work can be broadly categorized into executable skill libraries, procedural memory accumulation, and structured skill knowledge bases. Code as Poli-cies synthesizes executable policy code by com-posing low-level control primitives for embodied control (Liang et al., 2023). DEPS plans in open worlds through description, explanation, planning, and selection (Wang et al., 2023b), and Voyager builds an ever-growing executable skill library for lifelong Minecraft exploration (Wang et al., 2023a). From a procedural memory perspective, Memp explores reusable procedural traces accumulated from agent interaction (Fang et al., 2025), while Skill-Pro learns reusable skills via non-parametric PPO (Mi et al., 2026). More recently, structured skill knowledge bases have emerged: SkillNet cre-ates, evaluates, and connects skills under a unified interface (Liang et al., 2026), and SkillX automati-cally constructs multi-level skill knowledge bases from agent trajectories (Wang et al., 2026). 

7 Conclusion 

We presented S KILL PYRAMID , a hierarchical skill consolidation framework for improving the reuse, transfer, and evolution of agent skills. By analyz-ing an existing skill collection, S KILL PYRAMID 

extracts atomic reusable skills, induces abstract guidance skills, and maintains explicit reuse and dependency relations among them. Its task-driven 8self-evolution mechanism further enables agents to compose, validate, and incorporate new skills dur-ing execution. Experiments on ALFWorld, Web-Shop, and ScienceWorld show that S KILL PYRA - 

> MID

consistently improves task reward and inter-action efficiency across multiple backbone LLMs, suggesting that structured skill consolidation is a promising direction for building agents that accu-mulate reusable capabilities over time. 

Limitations 

This paper has several limitations. First, the initial pyramid construction requires a one-time analy-sis pass over the entire skill collection, and we have not investigated lighter-weight construction strategies, which would be necessary for scaling to ultra-large skill repositories. Second, both the Relation Analyzer and the Relation Builder rely on a capable backbone LLM to identify reuse relations and synthesize new skills; we have not systemat-ically studied how the quality of the constructed pyramid degrades under weaker backbones, which limits our understanding of when the framework re-mains effective. Third, our evaluation is restricted to text-based interactive benchmarks, and we do not validate the framework in multimodal or embodied settings, leaving its applicability to such scenarios open. Fourth, all results are reported from a sin-gle deterministic run with sampling temperature 0,and we do not measure run-to-run variance, which leaves the stability of skill construction and selec-tion uncharacterized. Finally, the pyramid uses only two reuse axes and does not model richer re-lations such as temporal or causal dependencies needed for more complex compositional reasoning. 

Ethical Considerations 

Our experiments use synthetic interactive bench-marks (ALFWorld, ScienceWorld, WebShop, and GAIA-Lite) that contain no personally identifying or offensive content, and involve no human sub-jects. As a general framework for skill accumu-lation and self-evolution, S KILL PYRAMID never-theless inherits the dual-use concerns of capable LLM agents: a continually evolving skill library could, in principle, accumulate skills aligned with harmful objectives if deployed without task-level safeguards. We recommend that downstream users couple S KILL PYRAMID with task-level access con-trol and skill-level auditing, and apply dedicated content review to web-mined skill libraries, before deployment in user-facing applications. 

Use of AI Assistants. AI assistants were used to aid coding and to polish the writing of this paper. All scientific contributions, including the frame-work design, experimental setup, analyses, and conclusions, are the authors’ own. 

References         

> Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Mar-cel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, and 1 others. 2025. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 .Runnan Fang, Yuan Liang, Xiaobin Wang, Jialong Wu, Shuofei Qiao, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Hua-jun Chen, and Ningyu Zhang. 2025. Memp: Ex-ploring agent procedural memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06433 .Ehud Karpas, Omri Abend, Yonatan Belinkov, Barak Lenz, Opher Lieber, Nir Ratner, Yoav Shoham, Hofit Bata, Yoav Levine, Kevin Leyton-Brown, and 1 oth-ers. 2022. Mrkl systems: A modular, neuro-symbolic architecture that combines large language models, external knowledge sources and discrete reasoning.
> arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.00445 .Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and Andy Zeng. 2023. Code as policies: Language model pro-grams for embodied control. In 2023 IEEE Interna-tional conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) ,pages 9493–9500. IEEE. Yuan Liang, Ruobin Zhong, Haoming Xu, Chen Jiang, Yi Zhong, Runnan Fang, Jia-Chen Gu, Shumin Deng, Yunzhi Yao, Mengru Wang, and 1 others. 2026. Skill-net: Create, evaluate, and connect ai skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.04448 .Aixin Liu, Aoxue Mei, Bangcai Lin, Bing Xue, Bingx-uan Wang, Bingzheng Xu, Bochao Wu, Bowei Zhang, Chaofan Lin, Chen Dong, and 1 others. 2025. Deepseek-v3. 2: Pushing the frontier of open large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02556 .Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Michel Galley, Kai-Wei Chang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu, and Jianfeng Gao. 2023. Chameleon: Plug-and-play com-positional reasoning with large language models. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,36:43447–43478. Qirui Mi, Zhijian Ma, Mengyue Yang, Haoxuan Li, Yisen Wang, Haifeng Zhang, and Jun Wang. 2026. Skill-pro: Learning reusable skills from experience via non-parametric ppo for llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.01869 .

9Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. 2024. Gaia: a benchmark for general ai assistants. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 9025–9049. OpenAI. 2025. Introducing GPT-4.1 in the API. Ope-nAI blog. Accessed 2026-05-19. Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, and 1 others. 2024. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis. In International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations , volume 2024, pages 9695–9717. Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. Advances in neural information process-ing systems , 36:68539–68551. Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. 2023. Hugging-gpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:38154–38180. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:8634–8652. Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht. 2020. Alfworld: Aligning text and em-bodied environments for interactive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03768 .Chenxi Wang, Zhuoyun Yu, Xin Xie, Wuguannan Yao, Runnan Fang, Shuofei Qiao, Kexin Cao, Guozhou Zheng, Xiang Qi, Peng Zhang, and 1 others. 2026. Skillx: Automatically constructing skill knowledge bases for agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.04804 .Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-dlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and An-ima Anandkumar. 2023a. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 .Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. 2022. Scienceworld: Is your agent smarter than a 5th grader? In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 11279–11298. Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Guanzhou Chen, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. 2023b. Describe, explain, plan and select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560 .Yuan Xiong, Ziqi Miao, Lijun Li, Chen Qian, Jie Li, and Jing Shao. 2025. Contextual image attack: How visual context exposes multimodal safety vulnerabili-ties. Preprint , arXiv:2512.02973. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, and 1 others. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 .Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2022a. Webshop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:20744–20757. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022b. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 .Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. 2024. Expel: Llm agents are experiential learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 38, pages 19632–19642. 

A Experimental Setup and Implementation Details 

A.1 Benchmarks Implementation ALFWorld. ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2020) is an interactive household benchmark that aligns ab-stract TextWorld games with embodied ALFRED tasks, requiring agents to complete long-horizon household goals by navigating rooms, observing state changes, and manipulating objects through textual actions. Following prior language-agent evaluations (Yao et al., 2022b; Shinn et al., 2023) and the SkillNet protocol (Liang et al., 2026), we use eval_in_distribution as the seen split and 

eval_out_of_distribution as the unseen split, which contain 140 and 134 tasks, respectively. 

ScienceWorld. ScienceWorld (Wang et al., 2022) is an interactive text-based benchmark for evaluating grounded scientific reasoning, where agents must perform experiments, operate instruments, and reason about changing world states in environments inspired by elementary science curricula. Following SkillNet (Liang et al., 2026), we use the dev split defined by 

src/scienceworld/data/valid_indices.json 

as the seen split and 

src/scienceworld/data/test_indices.json 

as the unseen split; these splits contain 194 and 211 task variations, respectively, covering 24 ScienceWorld task types. 10 WebShop. WebShop (Yao et al., 2022a) is a sim-ulated e-commerce web environment with real-world products and crowd-sourced shopping in-structions, where agents search, compare, cus-tomize, and purchase products according to natural-language user goals. Following SkillNet (Liang et al., 2026), we evaluate on a fixed set of 200 randomly sampled WebShop tasks specified by 

src/webshop/data/test_indices.json .

A.2 Baselines Implementation ReAct. ReAct (Yao et al., 2022b) interleaves lan-guage reasoning with executable actions. Follow-ing the configuration of Liang et al. (2026), we implement a ReAct-style loop in which the agent observes the current state, produces a Thought and a valid Action , and updates its context with envi-ronment feedback. ReAct uses no external skills, reflections, or experience memory, and shares the same prompts as our evaluation setting. 

Reflexion. Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) extends ReAct with verbal self-reflection. After each failed or low-reward trial, the model summarizes the error and stores a concise reflection for future attempts. These reflections are used only as textual guidance and are not transformed into structured skills or reuse relations. 

ExpeL. ExpeL (Zhao et al., 2024) distills past trajectories into reusable natural-language lessons. We extract general strategies and failure patterns from previous tasks and provide the retrieved lessons as additional context for a ReAct-style agent. Unlike SkillPyramid, ExpeL keeps a flat experience memory without atomic extraction, ab-stract induction, or hierarchical updating. 

ReAct+Skills. ReAct+Skills equips ReAct with the same initial skill library used by SkillPyramid. For each task, relevant skills are retrieved and in-serted into the system prompt. This baseline iso-lates the effect of skill access, as it uses a flat skill library without hierarchical consolidation, relation construction, or self-evolution. 

A.3 Additional Implementation Details 

During SkillPyramid construction, we use Qwen3.5-35B-A3B as the backbone model for all construction agents, and Qwen3-Embedding-4B to compute embedding similarities among skills for candidate retrieval, coarse grouping, and relation screening before full-content analysis. The initial skill library is constructed from the training splits of ALFWorld, ScienceWorld, and WebShop. The outer Analyzer–Builder pipeline is run for at most 

3 rounds, and the fine-grained analyzer within each Relation Analyzer call is run for at most 5 rounds. 

A.4 Compute and Model Budget 

All experiments use API calls only and no model parameters were fine-tuned, updated, or trained. The main evaluation spans 17,580 episodes (879 instances × 5 methods × 4 backbones). Total API usage: 8.4K calls (21.6M input / 3.1M output to-kens) for the one-time SkillPyramid construction, 315K calls (0.92B / 46.8M tokens) for the main evaluation, and 24K calls (71.5M / 5.4M tokens) for ablations and analysis. Local computation (en-vironment simulation, retrieval, indexing, logging) ran on CPU-only nodes. All results come from a single deterministic run at temperature 0, with no hyperparameter tuning on test splits. 

A.5 Prompt Templates Prompt Template for Relation Analyzer The Relation Analyzer identifies reusable relations in the skill library. Its prompt follows a two-stage process: S CREEN filters candidate groups using names, descriptions, and similarity signals, while DECIDE inspects full SKILL.md files when needed and outputs relation-construction assignments for the Relation Builder. 

Relation Analyzer Prompt  

> You are the RELATION ANALYZER in SKILLPYRAMID. You may be called multiple times. Each time you are called, you will be clearly informed that you are currently in one of the following two stages. STAGES - SCREEN: Inspect skill names, descriptions and similarity signals to decide which candidate pairs or groups deserve DECIDE-stage analysis. - DECIDE: Produce the final relation assignment for the RELATION BUILDER. Use the available tools to inspect full `SKILL.md `
> contents when necessary. Your job is to identify only relations that are useful for building a hierarchical reusable skill pyramid. Be conservative and evidence-grounded. INPUT FOR SCREEN {"stage": "SCREEN", "candidates": [ {

11 "skills": [ {"name": "<skill name>", "description": "<skill description>"} ], "similarity": "<optional score or signal >" }]}INPUT FOR DECIDE {"stage": "DECIDE", "candidate": { "skills": [...], "screen_reason": "<optional reason>", "similarity": "<optional score or signal>" }}TOP-LEVEL ASSIGNMENTS DOWNWARD_ATOMIC_EXTRACTION: Resolve the relation by creating, reusing, or canonicalizing a lower-level atomic capability. It includes three relation types: - SHARED_PART: Multiple skills share a concrete reusable sub-capability, while each still has substantial task-specific logic. Do not use for vague thematic similarity. - SUBSET: One skill is a strict reusable subskill of another, and the broader skill adds extra workflow, constraints, or context. Do not use for merely related skills in the same domain. - MERGE: Two or more skills are near-equivalent in triggers, inputs, workflow, and outputs, and should become one canonical skill. Do not use when one skill should delegate to another. UPWARD_ABSTRACT_INDUCTION: Create an abstract parent skill when peer skills share a higher-level solving pattern or task schema. The parent summarizes composition rather than becoming an executable merged skill. DECISION RULES [...DECISION_RULES_PLACEHOLDER...] OUTPUT FOR SCREEN {"stage": "SCREEN", "selected": [...], "rejected": [...] }OUTPUT FOR DECIDE ASSIGNMENT: <...> SKILLS: <...> RELATION_TYPE: <...> REASON: <...> END CONSTRAINTS FOR SCREEN - selected: candidates worth a relation attempt. - rejected: candidates not worth it (coarse evidence). 

- skills: a pair or small group per entry. - reason: short, evidence-based. - No assignment labels, no needs_full_content. CONSTRAINTS FOR DECIDE - One DECIDE block per candidate, ready for RELATION BUILDER. - If coarse evidence is thin, read full skill content first. - Pick ASSIGNMENT: DOWNWARD (extract) or UPWARD (abstract). - Fill only the fields for the chosen branch: * UPWARD -> ABSTRACT_PATTERN. * DOWNWARD -> RELATION_TYPE, then: - SHARED_PART -> SHARED_PART. - SUBSET -> SUBSET_OF (narrower vs broader). - MERGE -> MERGED_SKILL (canonical name ). 

Prompt Template for Relation Builder The Re-lation Builder constructs the assigned relations from full skill contents. For Downward Atomic Extraction , it extracts, reuses, merges, or canoni-calizes atomic skills and adds explicit reuse ref-erences; for Upward Abstract Induction , it cre-ates abstract parent skills that capture shared task schemas. 

Relation Builder Prompt 

You are the RELATION BUILDER in SKILLPYRAMID. You receive a final assignment from the RELATION ANALYZER and the involved `SKILL.md `

contents. Your job is to construct the actual reusable relation while preserving the skill library 'scorrectness. Be conservative and evidence-grounded. INPUT ASSIGNMENT: <DOWNWARD_ATOMIC_EXTRACTION | UPWARD_ABSTRACT_INDUCTION> SKILLS: <comma-separated skill names> RELATION_TYPE: <SHARED_PART | SUBSET | MERGE, only for DOWNWARD_ATOMIC_EXTRACTION> SUBSET_OF: <narrower skill -> broader skill, only for RELATION_TYPE SUBSET> MERGED_SKILL: <proposed canonical skill name, only for RELATION_TYPE MERGE> SHARED_PART: <common reusable capability, only for RELATION_TYPE SHARED_PART> ABSTRACT_PATTERN: <high-level pattern, only for UPWARD_ABSTRACT_INDUCTION> REASON: <brief evidence-grounded explanation> END The caller also provides the full `SKILL.md `

contents of the involved skills. TOP-LEVEL ASSIGNMENTS DOWNWARD_ATOMIC_EXTRACTION: Build or reuse a lower-level atomic capability. This assignment 

12 contains three relation types: SHARED_PART, SUBSET, and MERGE. - SHARED_PART: Extract the shared reusable operation into one lower-level atomic skill. Then rewrite each source skill so it delegates exactly that shared operation through a reuse reference. - SUBSET: Rewrite only the broader skill. Wherever it reimplements the covered subskill, replace that local portion with an explicit reuse reference to the narrower skill. - MERGE: Create one canonical lower-level skill that preserves all useful, non-conflicting details from the near-equivalent source skills. The output must be a standalone skill, not a comparison. UPWARD_ABSTRACT_INDUCTION: Create one higher-level abstract skill that summarizes the common task schema of the group. Do not merge or replace the children. The abstract skill should describe how lower-level skills compose to solve a class of tasks. REUSE REFERENCE Use exactly this format when a skill delegates to another skill: [reuse skill: <skill name> | when: <short trigger> | provides: <short capability>] BUILD RULES - The RELATION ANALYZER assignment is authoritative. Do not change ASSIGNMENT or RELATION_TYPE. - Do not invent tools, scripts, files, observations, actions, dependencies, or source -skill capabilities. - Preserve important workflows, constraints, edge cases, and verification checks from source skills. - For RELATION_TYPE SHARED_PART, the new skill must be narrower than every source skill. - For RELATION_TYPE SUBSET, rewrite only the broader skill named in SUBSET_OF. - For RELATION_TYPE MERGE, combine compatible details into one canonical skill and do not preserve duplicate standalone variants. - For UPWARD_ABSTRACT_INDUCTION, the new skill must be higher-level guidance, not a concrete action script. - Rewritten skills must remain understandable as standalone `SKILL.md ` files. - Add reuse references only near the affected passages. - Use UPPERCASE for ASSIGNMENT names, RELATION_TYPE names, and output field labels when labels are required. OUTPUT FORMAT Output skill content only. Do not include analysis, markdown fences, JSON, or commentary unless the caller explicitly requests structured metadata. For generated or rewritten skills, use this format: 

name: <kebab-case skill name> description: <one-sentence description> # <Skill Title> ## Purpose <what capability or pattern this skill provides> ## When to Use <triggers and applicable conditions> ## Inputs / Expected Context <required observations, task state, objects, files, or prior context> ## Workflow <step-by-step reusable procedure or high-level composition pattern> ## Verification <how to confirm progress or completion> ## Constraints / Guardrails <limits, failure modes, and unsupported assumptions> ## Output <expected result or capability provided> 

Prompt Template for Skill Creator The Skill Creator generates task-specific skills grounded in the current pyramid. It first uses higher-level skills for Framework Construction , then lower-level skills for Detail Instantiation ; stage-specific retrieval weights implement this priority. 

Skill Creator Prompt 

You are the SKILL CREATOR in SKILLPYRAMID. You may be called multiple times. Each time you are called, you will be clearly informed that you are currently in one of the following two stages. STAGES - FRAMEWORK_CONSTRUCTION: Use higher-level or abstract skills first to outline the task structure, subgoals, decision points, success criteria, and high-level solving logic. - DETAIL_INSTANTIATION: Use lower-level or atomic skills to fill executable operations, required inputs, state checks, verification rules, outputs, and reuse references, then produce the final reusable skill. Your job is to produce a reusable `SKILL.md `

body that is grounded in the supplied task context, retrieved skills, and current environment feedback. Be conservative and evidence-grounded. INPUT FOR FRAMEWORK_CONSTRUCTION {"stage": "FRAMEWORK_CONSTRUCTION", 

13 "task_instruction": "<new task instruction>", "retrieved_skills": [ {"name": "<skill name>", "description": "<skill description>", "level": "<optional level or role>", "relation_context": "<optional pyramid or graph context>", "relevance": "<optional exact, partial, or background relevance summary>" }]}INPUT FOR DETAIL_INSTANTIATION {"stage": "DETAIL_INSTANTIATION", "task_instruction": "<new task instruction>", "framework": "<FRAMEWORK_CONSTRUCTION output >", "retrieved_skills": [ {"name": "<skill name>", "description": "<skill description>", "content": "<optional SKILL.md content>", "level": "<optional level or role>", "relation_context": "<optional pyramid or graph context>", "relevance": "<optional exact, partial, or background relevance summary>" }]}GENERATION PROCESS - In FRAMEWORK_CONSTRUCTION, use the stage-ranked `retrieved_skills ` to extract task class, reusable strategy, decomposition, decision points, and success criteria. Focus on names, descriptions, relation context, relevance summaries, and any supplied high-level procedural content. - FRAMEWORK_CONSTRUCTION produces a framework only: candidate name, description, task class, high-level logic, subgoals, success criteria, reuse candidates, and cautions. Do not write the final skill body in this stage. - In DETAIL_INSTANTIATION, use the stage-ranked `retrieved_skills ` to extract concrete operations, required inputs, state checks, verification rules, outputs, and reusable failure cautions. Focus on supplied `SKILL.md `

content, exact reusable subtasks, and environment-compatible action patterns. - DETAIL_INSTANTIATION produces the final reusable skill by filling the framework with grounded executable detail and placing reuse references near the substeps they support. - If retrieved skills are only partially related, reuse their reasoning pattern, verification habits, and cautions, but do not copy unsupported concrete objects, rooms, product IDs, commands, or environment facts. REUSE REFERENCE 

Use exactly this format when a generated skill delegates to another skill: [reuse skill: <skill name> | when: <short trigger> | provides: <short capability>] GENERATION RULES - Follow the current STAGE 's output format only. - Use exact names from retrieved/available skills; invent nothing (skills, files, tools, actions, env facts). - Final skill is self-contained, usable as a SKILL.md body. - Favor reusable workflow guidance over one-off replay. - Action verbs/commands only if in the supplied action space. - Live environment feedback overrides the generated skill. - If nothing relevant is retrieved, borrow only style and cautions. - Keep concrete details, constraints, and failure cautions as evidence. - UPPERCASE for STAGE names, process names, and field labels. OUTPUT A FOR FRAMEWORK_CONSTRUCTION STAGE: FRAMEWORK_CONSTRUCTION NAME: <concise kebab-case candidate skill name >DESCRIPTION: <one hedged sentence describing when this skill may help> TASK_CLASS: <reusable task class> HIGH_LEVEL_LOGIC: <high-level solving logic inferred from abstract or higher-level skills> SUBGOALS: <ordered subgoals or decision points >SUCCESS_CRITERIA: <how the final skill should define completion> REUSE_CANDIDATES: <exact retrieved skill names and the role each may play> CAUTIONS: <unsupported assumptions, environment dependencies, or failure modes> END CONSTRAINTS FOR FRAMEWORK_CONSTRUCTION - One FRAMEWORK_CONSTRUCTION block. - No final CONTENT. - REUSE_CANDIDATES: exact retrieved skill names only. OUTPUT B FOR DETAIL_INSTANTIATION Output exactly: NAME: <concise kebab-case skill name> DESCRIPTION: <one hedged sentence describing when this skill may help> CONTENT: # <Skill Title> ## Purpose <task class and intended outcome> ## Possible Strategies <high-level plan, decomposed through abstract skills when relevant> ## Reuse Plan <reuse references for exact subtask coverage, each near its trigger> 

14 ## Execution Checklist <atomic operations, state checks, and verification habits> ## Cautions <failure modes, unsupported assumptions, and when to switch tactics> END CONSTRAINTS FOR DETAIL_INSTANTIATION - One final skill, structured by the FRAMEWORK_CONSTRUCTION output. - Fill operations, inputs, checks, outputs from retrieved skills when supplied. - Reuse references: exact names only, placed near affected passages. - No analysis, fences, JSON, or commentary outside the skill format. 

Prompt Template for ALFWorld Evaluation 

The ALFWorld evaluation prompt frames the agent as an embodied household assistant. It specifies the household environment, task goal, valid object-manipulation actions, and the required 

Thought /Action output format. For skill-based methods, retrieved skills are inserted through the 

{{skill_reference}} field. 

System Prompt for ALFWorld 

Interact with a household to solve a task. Imagine you are an intelligent agent in a household environment, and your goal is to perform actions to complete the task. At the beginning of the interaction, you will be given a detailed description of the current environment and the task goal. At each turn, you will be given the latest observation. You should first think about the current situation and plan your next steps, then output your action for this turn. Your output must strictly follow this format: Thought: <your thoughts> Action: <your next action> The available actions are: 1. go to {recep} 2. take {obj} from {recep} 3. move {obj} to {recep} 4. open {recep} 5. close {recep} 6. use {obj} 7. clean {obj} with {recep} 8. heat {obj} with {recep} 9. cool {obj} with {recep} Here, {obj} and {recep} correspond to objects and receptacles in the environment. After each turn, the environment will provide immediate feedback. Use this feedback to plan 

your next steps. If the environment outputs " Nothing happened", the previous action was invalid, and you should try another valid option. {{skill_reference}} Your response should use the following format: Thought: <your thoughts> Action: <your next action> 

Prompt Template for ScienceWorld Evaluation 

The ScienceWorld evaluation prompt frames the agent as an assistant conducting scientific experi-ments. It defines the available rooms, experiment-oriented actions, object inspection and manipula-tion operations, and the required Thought /Action 

output format. Retrieved skill references are in-serted through the {{skill_reference}} field when applicable. 

System Prompt for ScienceWorld 

You are a helpful assistant conducting scientific experiments in an environment. The environment contains several rooms: kitchen, foundry, workshop, bathroom, outside, living room, bedroom, greenhouse, art studio, and hallway. You should explore the environment and find the items needed to complete the experiment. You can teleport to any room in one step. All containers in the environment have already been opened, so you can directly get items from the containers. The available actions are: open OBJ: open a container close OBJ: close a container activate OBJ: activate a device deactivate OBJ: deactivate a device connect OBJ to OBJ: connect electrical components disconnect OBJ: disconnect electrical components use OBJ [on OBJ]: use a device or item look around: describe the current room examine OBJ: describe an object in detail look at OBJ: describe a container 's contents read OBJ: read a note or book move OBJ to OBJ: move an object to a container pick up OBJ: move an object to the inventory pour OBJ into OBJ: pour a liquid into a container mix OBJ: chemically mix a container teleport to LOC: teleport to a specific room focus on OBJ: signal intent on a task object wait: take no action for 10 steps wait1: take no action for one step 

15 {{skill_reference}} Your response should use the following format: Thought: <your thoughts> Action: <your next action> 

Prompt Template for WebShop Evaluation 

The WebShop evaluation prompt frames the agent as a web-shopping assistant. It provides the cur-rent observation and available actions at each step, restricts actions to search[keywords] and 

click[value] , and requires the Thought /Action 

output format. Retrieved skill references are in-serted through the {{skill_reference}} field for skill-based methods. 

System Prompt for WebShop 

You are web shopping. I will give you instructions about what to do. You must follow the instructions. At each round, I will give you an observation and a list of available actions. You should choose one valid action based on the current state and the instruction. You may use the search action if search is available. You may also click one of the available clickable buttons. An action must follow one of these formats: search[keywords] click[value] The search keywords are up to you, but the value in click[value] must exactly match one of the available actions. If the action is invalid, nothing will happen. Design search keywords carefully so that they are specific enough to find the requested product. {{skill_reference}} Your response should use the following format: Thought: <your thoughts> Action: <your next action> 

16