Title: Anticipate and Learn: Unleashing Idle-Time Compute in Proactive Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25971v1

Published Time: Tue, 26 May 2026 02:40:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# Anticipate and Learn: Unleashing Idle-Time Compute in Proactive Agents 

Haoyi Hu ∗,1, Qirong Lyu ∗,1, Xianghan Kong 1, Weiwen Liu 1,†, Jianghao Lin 1, Zixuan Guo 2, Yan Xu 2,

Yasheng Wang 2, Weinan Zhang 1, Yong Yu 1

> 1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University , 2Tencent  

> ∗Equal contribution

, † Corresponding author 

While AI agents demonstrate remarkable capabilities in reasoning and tool use, they remain fundamentally reactive: they compute responses only after explicit user prompts. This paradigm ignores a critical opportu-nity: the idle time between interactions is largely wasted, leaving agents unable to prepare for future user needs. To bridge this gap, we introduce ProAct, a proactive agent architecture that leverages idle-time com-pute to anticipate and fulfill likely upcoming user needs. By analyzing evolving dialogue history together with persistent memory, ProAct predicts upcoming needs and iteratively acquires information, allowing the agent to resolve knowledge gaps and prepare evidence before the user initiates a query. To rigorously evaluate proactive capabilities, we also introduce ProActEval, a comprehensive benchmark comprising 200 scenarios across 40 domains, featuring predictable need chains and diverse user cognitive profiles. Empir-ical results demonstrate significant advantages over reactive baselines. ProAct accelerates task completion by reducing required turns by 14.8%, decreases user effort by 11.7%, and cuts hallucination rates by 28.1% on ProActEval. Furthermore, MemBench evaluations confirm that ProAct achieves state-of-the-art reflective accuracy, underscoring its sustained and robust performance.   

> #Contact:

Weiwen Liu (wwliu@sjtu.edu.cn) 

§ Code: https://github.com/AgentACE-AI/ProAct 

## 1 Introduction 

Despite rapid advancements in conversational fluency, complex reasoning, and tool execution (Wang et al., 2024, 2025; Liu et al., 2024), today’s deployed AI agents remain largely reactive and static (Lu et al., 2024). They operate on a request-response basis, with processing initiated only after an explicit request is issued (Hu et al., 2024; Lu et al., 2024). Consequently, once a task is completed, the agent returns to a dormant state. This design underutilizes potentially valuable idle time that could otherwise be used to refine the agent’s understanding of the user, anticipate probable future needs, and proactively prepare useful support for upcoming interactions (Wang et al., 2024). This limitation contrasts with the psychological concept of proactive coping (Greenglass, 1999; Drummond and Brough, 2016), a future-oriented strategy in which individuals anticipate upcoming demands, accumulate resources, and prepare for prospective goals before those demands fully materialize. Drawing on this distinction, we argue that AI agents should view the idle time between user turns not as empty delay, but as an opportunity to anticipate, learn, and prepare for likely future demands .This motivates a new human–AI collaboration paradigm: during the idle time between tasks, the agent continuously evolves rather than remaining static. Instead of concentrating all computation at the moment of interaction, the agent shifts substantial work into off-peak periods. From accumulated interaction history, the agent infers personalized preference patterns and future interests before they are explicitly requested. Figure 1 illustrates this idea with a project-review scenario: after scheduling a meeting, a proactive agent can infer that review materials may soon be needed, prepare supporting content during the idle window, and deliver it only when a value-aware gate judges the intervention useful. The core challenge, then, is how to transform idle time into useful proactive work without overwhelming the user with irrelevant, premature, or weakly grounded suggestions (Lu et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2025). We present ProAct, a unified architecture that turns idle time into a structured cycle of anticipation and learning. ProAct is driven by two tightly coupled modules. Future-State Prediction continuously forecasts the user’s la-1

> arXiv:2605.25971v1 [cs.CL] 25 May 2026

Traditional Reactive Agent 

ProAct     

> User asks Idle window starts Next interaction
> User
> z
> No prediction or preparation.
> Can you prepare 10
> executive-style slides
> on project progress,
> risks, and next steps,
> with charts and
> speaker notes?
> User
> Anticipate the likely slide request: content,
> structure, charts, and speaker notes.
> I've prepared the
> slides for your review.
> User
> Schedule the project
> review meeting for
> 10:00 AM tomorrow.
> z
> z
> User
> Sure. I will need to
> gather the details and
> draft the slides now...
> Schedule the project
> review meeting for
> 10:00 AM tomorrow.
> The meeting has
> been scheduled.
> Interaction Timeline
> Reactive Timeline
> t0 t1 t2

IDLE WINDOW   

> The meeting has
> been scheduled.
> Agent
> Agent Agent
> Agent
> Value-Aware Push Gate
> Proactive Timeline Idle window starts User asks Push slides update

Figure 1 Current assistants wait for explicit requests and leave idle-time compute unused. ProAct instead uses dialogue history and persistent memory to predict likely future needs, explores high-value candidates during idle windows, and feeds the resulting knowledge back into later interactions. 

tent future demands. Rather than relying solely on the most recent utterance, this module integrates the dialogue history with persistent memory that captures user profiles, prior summaries, stored facts, and unresolved memory gaps to project likely upcoming intents. Idle-Time Acquisition subsequently evaluates these predicted needs based on expected user relevance, existing knowledge gaps, incremental value, and timeliness, judiciously allocating back-ground computation only to high-value candidates. For these accepted candidates, the system retrieves and verifies supporting evidence, generates compact knowledge artifacts, and commits them to memory. Consequently, these insights can be proactively delivered, woven into subsequent responses, or silently retrieved the moment the user’s anticipated need materializes. To evaluate idle-time compute for proactive agents, we introduce ProActEval, a 200-scenario, 40-domain evaluation framework with predictable need chains and diverse user cognitive profiles. On ProActEval, ProAct accelerates task completion by reducing required turns by 14.8%, decreases user effort by 11.7%, and cuts hallucination rates by 28.1% on ProActEval compared with a reactive baseline. On MemBench, ProAct achieves 84.3% reflective accuracy at 10k tokens and 86.3% at 100k tokens. This underscores the effectiveness of our idle-time compute for proactive agents, highlighting their potential to actively anticipate and learn to enhance user experiences. Our core contributions are summarized as follows: 

• We formulate a proactive human–AI collaboration paradigm and instantiate it in ProAct, an architecture that uses Future-State Prediction and Idle-Time Acquisition to turn idle intervals into grounded preparation for likely future needs. 

• We introduce ProActEval , a 200-scenario, 40-domain evaluation framework for benchmarking proactive agents with predictable need chains and diverse cognitive profiles. 

• We empirically validate ProAct, showing that it reduces interaction turns by 14.8%, lowers user effort by 11.7%, and mitigates hallucinations by 28.1% on ProActEval, while achieving strong reflective accuracy on MemBench. 

## 2 Related Work 

Memory-augmented LLM agents. Several recent systems extend LLM agents with persistent memory. Genera-tive Agents (Park et al., 2023) maintain a memory stream with reflection and importance scoring but lack structured deduplication or lifecycle management. MemGPT (Packer et al., 2023) introduces a virtual memory hierarchy inspired by operating systems, enabling paging between fast and archival memory; however, it does not model user profiles or support proactive behavior. MemoryBank (Zhong et al., 2024) implements hierarchical daily summaries with an Ebbinghaus forgetting mechanism but operates strictly on demand. SCMemory (Wang et al., 2023a) proposes self-controlled memory selection but remains reactive. GAM (Yan et al., 2025) further reframes memory as just-in-time context construction but remains primarily request-driven and lacks proactive anticipation. In contrast, ProAct uni-fies vector, relational, and document storage with an active knowledge lifecycle, incrementally updates user profiles and interaction-grounded facts, and couples memory directly to proactive behavior. 2Proactive and anticipatory agents. Proactive computing has a long history in mobile and ubiquitous computing, but its integration with LLM-based agents is still early (Liao et al., 2023). Recent work has explored proactive dialogue systems that predict user needs based on conversational context (Deng et al., 2023), and self-reflective agents that trig-ger additional reasoning when uncertainty is high (Shinn et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b). More recent agent systems such as OpenClaw and Hermes move toward always-on personal assistants, enabling scheduled checks, reminders, and automated task execution. However, their proactive behavior is still largely initiated through user-specified schedules, routines, or explicit automation instructions, rather than through autonomous anticipation of unstated future needs. These systems therefore remain limited in two ways: they either rely on the current conversational context to decide when to act, or depend on user-defined triggers after deployment. In contrast, ProAct proactively infers future information needs without requiring users to predefine tasks or schedules. Its proactive pipeline uses long-term user grounding, value-aware evaluation that balances information utility against interruption cost, and incremental research that reuses prior findings. 

Inference-time compute. Another line of work improves LLM agents by allocating additional computation to planning, reflection, or iterative refinement at inference time. Self-reflective agents use feedback from past attempts to improve future actions, and recent test-time computation methods show that additional reasoning can improve performance on difficult tasks (Lin et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2026; Gupta et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2025). However, these methods remain reactive: additional computation is triggered only after a user has issued a request, and is used to improve the response to that request rather than to anticipate and prepare for future user needs during idle periods. ProAct instead treats background computation as a proactive mechanism, it predicts likely future needs, evaluates whether acting on them is worthwhile, and incrementally prepares grounded assistance using long-term memory and prior findings. 

## 3 Method 

3.1 Overview 

ProAct is designed for multi-turn settings in which the dialogue history and persistent memory state make some future information needs predictable. Instead of waiting for an explicit request, the assistant uses this state to predict follow-up needs and prepare supporting evidence during idle intervals. Figure 2 summarizes this loop: foreground interactions update memory, which then conditions prediction, acquisition, and delivery decisions in the following idle interval. The memory layer maintains user profiles, entity-level facts, conversation summaries, and acquired artifacts. During an idle interval, Future-State Prediction generates a compact set of candidate future needs from the dialogue his-tory and persistent memory state. Idle-Time Acquisition scores the predicted needs, allocates idle-time budget to candidates worth additional computation, and performs evidence search or artifact generation when external support is needed. A delivery policy then decides whether an artifact should be pushed immediately, queued for later use, or stored silently in memory. 

3.2 Proactive Agent Formulation 

We formulate proactive agent interaction as a closed-loop decision problem. After each foreground interaction, the agent updates its memory, predicts possible future needs, allocates idle-time computation to valuable candidates, and decides how the resulting preparation should be handled. This formulation ties prediction, acquisition, and delivery to a single policy, rather than treating idle-time compute as unconstrained background search. Let Ht = {(u1, a 1), . . . , (ut, a t)} denote the dialogue history up to turn t, where ui and ai are the user message and assistant response at turn i. Let Mt be the persistent memory state before idle-time computation. After the current response, the system may receive an idle window ∆t with computation or retrieval budget Bt. In the meeting-schedule example in Figure 1, Ht contains the recent scheduling exchange, while Mt may contain remembered project context such as progress updates, risks, milestones, or prior artifacts. The predictor generates a set of possible future needs: 

Zt = fpred (Ht, M t).

3user input  assistant response 

> Post-Turn Extraction
> latent intents,
> epistemic facts,
> preferences
> Option B: Response
> Generation

3. Idle-Time Proactive Computation 

> Option A: Proactive
> Intervention
> Option C: Silent Evidence Store
> Agent

1. Foreground Interaction Turn t   

> User Response
> dialogue
> history H ₜ
> memory
> state M ₜ
> Idle-Time Acquisition
> candidate
> content
> supporting
> evidence
> provenance
> metadata
> Value-guided
> candidate selection
> Iterative evidence
> retrieval
> Evidence-grounded
> synthesis
> Future-State Prediction
> predicts future
> information needs
> Z1
> travel
> planning
> Z2
> budgeting
> tools
> Z3
> paper recs

4. Utility-Aware 

Delivery Policy 

U(x ₜ) = E[V(x ₜ)] − C(t) > τ 

V: Information Value 

C: interruption cost 

τ: adaptive threshold    

> High Value High Cost
> Proactive
> Intervention
> Push to
> user
> Response
> Generation
> Weave into
> reply
> Silent Evidence
> Store
> Store without
> interrupt
> Candidate
> Content
> User Persona
> Knowledge Base
> preferences facts conversation
> traces
> retrieved
> knowledge

2. Persistent Memory M t

> Foreground interaction
> (within the current turn)
> Post-turn extraction
> (response → memory update)
> Proactive delivery
> (policy-driven outputs)

Figure 2 ProAct overview. After each foreground interaction, the agent updates persistent memory, predicts likely future needs during idle intervals, and acquires evidence for high-value candidates. A utility-aware delivery policy then handles the resulting artifacts for future use. 

Each candidate z ∈ Z t is represented as 

z = ( qz , e z , c z , ρ z ),

where qz is the anticipated need, ez is the grounding rationale from Ht or Mt, cz is the prediction confidence, and ρz

is the retrieval plan used if the candidate is selected for acquisition. For instance, a likely request for review materials can be grounded in the scheduled meeting and remembered project state, while its retrieval plan can point to relevant progress, risk, milestone, or metric evidence. Given (Ht, M t, ∆t, B t), the proactive policy π selects candidates, allocates budget, generates artifacts when useful, and assigns each prepared artifact a delivery decision dz . The policy is optimized for future utility under interruption, budget, and factuality constraints: 

max 

π E

h

Ufuture (π; Ht, M t) − λiCinterrupt (π) − λbCbudget (π) − λhRhallucination (π)

i

.

Here, Ufuture denotes the expected benefit of proactive preparation, such as reduced user effort, higher coverage, or faster completion. Cinterrupt , Cbudget , and Rhallucination denote interruption cost, computation cost, and hallucination risk, respectively. Their weights λi, λb, and λh control the corresponding trade-offs. Because downstream utility is not directly observable during idle intervals, ProAct uses a candidate-level value score for acquisition gating: 

S(z) = wr rz + wg gz + wv vz + wτ τz , wr + wg + wv + wτ = 1 .

Here, rz measures user relevance, gz measures the knowledge gap, vz measures incremental value beyond existing memory, and τz measures timeliness. The weights wr , w g , w v , w τ specify their relative importance. This score is used by Idle-Time Acquisition to decide which predicted needs are worth preparing for. 

3.3 Future-State Prediction 

Future-State Prediction instantiates fpred in Section 3.2. Rather than expanding the search space broadly, it constructs a compact candidate set Zt whose members are traceable to the current dialogue, persistent memory, or identified 4memory gaps. In the meeting-schedule example, this means predicting needs that naturally follow from the upcoming review, such as preparing progress summaries, risk updates, or supporting evidence. 

Candidate generation. The predictor generates candidates from two sources. First, local scenario prediction ex-trapolates near-term follow-up needs from the recent turns and immediate task reflected in Ht. Second, related expansion proposes adjacent topics grounded in Mt, including user profiles, conversation summaries, stored arti-facts, and unresolved goals. The former captures needs directly implied by the current interaction, while the latter supports longer-range preparation based on stable user interests or ongoing projects. 

Memory-gap augmentation. The predictor also receives signals from memory maintenance. When the memory layer identifies stale, incomplete, weakly supported, or missing knowledge, these gaps are converted into candidate future needs and added to Zt. This allows memory maintenance to shape acquisition targets, instead of serving only as passive storage. 

Filtering and prioritization. The raw candidate set is filtered by confidence and deduplicated against artifacts already stored in Mt. Candidates with confidence below θconf are removed. The remaining candidates are grouped by topic similarity and prioritized, reducing near-duplicate exploration while preserving distinct future directions. The output is the structured set Zt passed to Idle-Time Acquisition. 

3.4 Idle-Time Acquisition and Delivery 

Idle-Time Acquisition implements the acquisition and delivery components of the policy π. Given the predicted candidates Zt, it applies the value gate from Section 3.2, checks memory coverage, acquires missing evidence when needed, and routes the resulting artifacts for later use. 

Value evaluation. For each candidate z, the module computes the value score S(z). A candidate is acquired only if S(z) ≥ θval . Candidates below the threshold may be retained for later consideration, but they do not consume immediate evidence-search or artifact-generation budget. 

Memory-aware acquisition. For accepted candidates, the module first checks whether the existing memory state 

Mt already contains sufficient evidence. If memory coverage is high, the system reuses stored evidence and avoids redundant search. If coverage is partial, it searches only for missing subtopics. If coverage is low, it decomposes the candidate into sub-questions and performs iterative search, evidence extraction, and coverage checking. This makes idle-time acquisition incremental rather than a full restart for every predicted need. 

Artifact generation. Retrieved or remembered evidence is used to generate a compact knowledge artifact Az .Each artifact contains the candidate need it supports, a preparation note, and provenance linking it to remembered or retrieved evidence. This provenance allows proactively prepared content to be reused in later responses without weakening factual grounding. 

Utility-aware delivery. After each artifact generation, the delivery policy selects a delivery mode dz ∈ { push , queue , store }.An artifact is pushed only when its expected future utility justifies the interruption cost. If it is useful but not urgent, it is queued for integration into a later response. If it is potentially useful but not appropriate for immediate delivery, it is stored silently in memory. This gate separates proactive assistance from background accumulation: prepared knowledge is acted on only when doing so is expected to help the user. 

Memory update. After acquisition and delivery decisions, each artifact and its provenance are written back into memory, allowing later predictions and responses to reuse grounded preparation. The resulting loop is 

(Ht, M t) → Z t → S(z) → Az → dz → Mt+1 .

Thus, memory serves as the shared state that couples prediction, acquisition, delivery, and future response genera-tion. 54 ProActEval 

Evaluating proactive agents requires more than testing whether a system can answer the current question. Existing memory benchmarks (Tan et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024; Du et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024) primarily eval-uate reactive recall or long-term question answering, while proactive benchmarks (Lu et al., 2024; De Min et al., 2026) focus on task prediction from activity traces rather than memory-grounded anticipation in conversation. A bench-mark for this setting must specify which future needs are reasonably predictable, which facts ground those needs, and when proactive delivery should reduce later user effort. We introduce ProActEval, an evaluation framework with 200 scenarios across 40 domains, fictional entities, scenario-specific fact sheets, and predictable need chains that measure whether agents can anticipate future conversational needs, reduce user effort, and maintain factual integrity. 

4.1 Benchmark Construction 

Each ProActEval scenario is built around a self-contained fact sheet and an ordered set of user needs. The fact sheet contains atomic facts with stable identifiers. All scenario-specific entities, including people, organizations, addresses, dates, emails, and internal URLs, are fictional. This controlled setup supports auditable factual evaluation: a response is correct only when it can be traced to the provided facts, and unsupported content is counted as hallucination. The user needs define the interaction structure. Each need has an importance label, one or more grounding fact identifiers, and a turn order. Some needs also contain a predictable_after field indicating that the need becomes reasonably anticipatable after earlier needs have been addressed. Needs are organized into reveal groups to model local topic structure and topic shifts. Together, these annotations form a user-needs graph. The assistant cannot see the graph at runtime, but the simulator and evaluator use it to determine when proactive coverage should reduce future user effort. We organize scenarios around five cognitive archetypes: Foundational Memory, Translation and Gap Resolution, Trace and Dependency Reasoning, Handoff and Consistency Control, and Readiness and Follow-through. These archetypes are not task labels for the model. They are construction controls that ensure the benchmark covers different forms of anticipatory demand, from recalling stable facts to preparing for delayed follow-up actions. 

4.2 Data Synthesis Pipeline 

Scenario generation proceeds in stages. We begin with manually designed seed scenarios spanning personal life management, professional work, education, public services, finance, compliance, healthcare-adjacent support, and other specialized settings. For each seed, we first generate the scenario-specific fact sheet and then generate the ordered user-need sequence conditioned on that fact sheet. Separating fact generation from need generation makes it easier to audit grounding and predictability. Generated scenarios are checked automatically for structural validity. The checks enforce unique identifiers, legal fact references, acyclic predictability links, valid turn order, and reveal-group consistency. For grouped scenarios, additional checks require enough cross-group predictability and enough auditable proactive targets so that the in-stance does not collapse into a purely reactive conversation. After automatic validation, each scenario receives manual review for factual consistency, naturalness of need progression, plausibility of predictability links, and judge-friendliness. Appendix V reports the benchmark composition statistics. 

4.3 Evaluation Protocol 

Each scenario-condition pair is evaluated with the same three-stage loop. A user simulator traverses the ordered need sequence and emits a user message for the next unmet need. If the assistant has already covered a future need proactively, the simulator skips that need, translating anticipation into reduced user effort. The system under test then responds using only runtime-visible information: the user profile, the fact sheet loaded into memory or search, and the conversation history. It never receives gold fields such as user_needs , key_fact_ids , predictable_after ,or reveal_group . An LLM-based coverage judge finally marks which facts were correctly conveyed, which claims were distorted or unsupported, and which needs were addressed. 6Table 1 Headline end-to-end results on the two evaluation suites.                              

> Suite Evaluates Primary endpoint Baseline ProAct Change
> MemBench Reflective memory 10k Acc. ↑0.742 0.843 +13.6% MemBench Reflective memory 100k Acc. ↑0.833 0.863 +3.6% ProActEval Proactive assistance T100 ↓8.110 6.910 -14.8% ProActEval Proactive assistance User Effort ↓9.140 8.075 -11.7%

4.4 Metrics 

We report seven metrics organized around efficiency, factual integrity, and coverage. T80 and T100 measure the number of turns needed to reach 80% and 100% must-have coverage, respectively, while User Effort counts the turns in which the user explicitly asks a question. Fact Accuracy measures the proportion of correctly conveyed facts among all facts delivered, and Hallucination Rate measures the proportion of unsupported claims. Total Coverage and Must-Have Coverage measure the fraction of all needs and must-have needs satisfied by the end of the conversation, respectively. 

## 5 Experiments 

We organize the evaluation around two main questions. (1) We ask whether prediction-guided idle-time compute improves proactive assistance in multi-turn conversations. We answer this question on ProActEval , where each sce-nario provides a fact sheet and an ordered sequence of user needs. We compare three conditions: a reactive assistant, an undirected idle-time compute variant, and the full prediction-guided system. This comparison evaluates the end-to-end benefit of proactive assistance while also ablating predictive direction: the gap between Undirected Idle and the full system tests whether background search alone is sufficient, or whether idle-time compute must be assigned to predicted needs. (2) We ask whether the memory backbone can reliably support such proactive behavior by preserv-ing long-horizon user information. We answer this question on MemBench , focusing on its reflective participation setting, which tests whether a system can infer user preferences and emotions from accumulated interaction history. Finally, we extend the analysis by varying the idle-search budget on ProActEval to study the cost–efficiency trade-off of proactive computation. 

5.1 Main Proactivity Evaluation 

We evaluate proactive assistance on all 200 ProActEval scenarios by comparing a reactive baseline, an Idle-Time Acquisition variant without predictive direction, and the full prediction-guided ProAct. Reactive is a non-proactive baseline that disables both Future-State Prediction and Idle-Time Acqisition . Undirected Idle enables Idle-Time Acqisition but removes predictive direction, using unguided background intents. Directed Idle is the full ProAct configuration, enabling both Future-State Prediction and Idle-Time Acqisition . This design allows us to measure the end-to-end benefit of proactive assistance while isolating the contribution of predictive direction. 

Overall Proactive Gains. Table 2 expands the ProActEval summary in Table 1 by reporting coverage, anticipation, factual integrity, and compute cost. Directed Idle improves all non-cost metrics over both baselines, showing that prediction-guided idle-time computation improves not only turn efficiency but also proactive coverage and factual grounding. 

Ablation Study. The comparison between Undirected Idle and Directed Idle isolates the value of predictive direction. Although Undirected Idle performs Idle-Time Acquisition and spends 69.8k active tokens per scenario on average, it only slightly improves over Reactive , reducing T100 by 0.9% and User Effort by 1.1%. By contrast, adding predictive direction in Directed Idle reduces T100 by 14.1% and User Effort by 10.7% relative to Undirected Idle , and achieves an Anticipation Recall of 0.428 where both other settings remain at 0. These results suggest that the gains do not come from Idle-Time Acquisition alone, but from directing that acquisition toward predicted needs; undirected background compute adds cost but yields only limited proactive benefit. 7Table 2 Detailed ProActEval results over 200 scenarios. Reactive disables both proactive modules; Undirected Idle enables idle-time acquisition without future-state prediction; Directed Idle is the full ProAct configuration. Delta columns report changes for Directed Idle relative to each baseline, except Anticipation Recall and Active Tokens, where deltas are absolute. Active Tokens are measured as additional active-token cost. 

Metric Reactive Undirected Idle Directed Idle ∆ vs. Reactive ∆ vs. Undirected Efficiency 

T80 ↓ 6.615 6.600 5.530 −16 .4% −16 .2% 

T100 ↓ 8.110 8.040 6.910 −14 .8% −14 .1% 

User Effort ↓ 9.140 9.040 8.075 −11 .7% −10 .7% 

Coverage and Anticipation 

Total Coverage ↑ 0.892 0.905 0.956 +7 .2% +5 .6% 

Must-Have Coverage ↑ 0.938 0.950 0.977 +4 .2% +2 .9% 

Anticipation Recall ↑ 0.000 0.000 0.428 +0 .428 +0 .428 

Factual Integrity and Cost 

Fact Accuracy ↑ 0.972 0.972 0.985 +1 .3% +1 .3% 

Hallucination Rate ↓ 0.132 0.124 0.095 −28 .1% −23 .1% 

Active Tokens ↓ 0 69.8k 111.8k +111.8k +42.0k  

> Table 3 Comparison with ProactiveAgent on 200 ProActEval scenarios. Judge-labeled Ant.R. is the scenario-level macro average; Anticipated Needs reports the corresponding micro count over all predictable needs.

Method T80 ↓ T100 ↓ User Effort ↓ Judge-labeled Ant.R. ↑ Anticipated Needs ↑

ProactiveAgent 5.600 7.145 8.425 0.020 32 / 1,572 ProAct ( Directed Idle ) 5.530 6.910 8.075 0.447 703 / 1,572 

Comparison with ProactiveAgent. We adapt the public ProactiveAgent decision protocol (Lu et al., 2024) as a GPT-4o prompting baseline. Since this baseline sees the user profile and full fact sheet but does not expose structured delivered fact IDs, we compare systems using judge-labeled Anticipation Recall rather than runtime fact-ID matching. Table 3 shows that ProactiveAgent’s proactive behavior remains largely turn-local: it anticipates only 32 of 1,572 predictable needs, yielding 0.020 judge-labeled Anticipation Recall. By contrast, ProAct anticipates 703 of 1,572 pre-dictable needs, reaching 0.447 judge-labeled Anticipation Recall while also modestly improving turn efficiency over ProactiveAgent. This suggests that proactive behavior is not sufficient by itself: it must cover predictable, benchmark-relevant needs to reduce later user effort. 

5.2 Memory Evaluation 

We evaluate whether the memory backbone can support proactive assistance using the reflective participation set-ting of MemBench at 10k and 100k token scales with Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct. The main metric is reflective accuracy, which measures whether the system can infer user preferences and emotions from accumulated interaction history. We compare against FullMemory, RecentMemory, RetrievalMemory, GenerativeAgent (Park et al., 2023), Memory-Bank (Zhong et al., 2024), MemGPT (Packer et al., 2023), and SCMemory (Wang et al., 2023a). ProAct achieves the strongest reflective accuracy at both context lengths, improving over the best prior baseline from 0.742 to 0.843 at 10k tokens and from 0.833 to 0.863 at 100k tokens. Detailed baseline comparisons, scenario-level results, and memory-efficiency measurements are reported in Appendix N. 

5.3 Search Budget Analysis 

Budget sweep setup. We further study how the amount of idle-time acquisition affects proactive assistance. On a matched 50-scenario subset, we vary the search budget k ∈ { 4, 8, 12 , 16 } and compare Directed Idle (k) with 

Undirected Idle (k) under the same budget. This controlled sweep tests whether increasing idle-time search mono-tonically improves interaction efficiency, and whether predictive direction remains beneficial when search volume 8Figure 3 Search-budget analysis on a matched 50-scenario subset. Panels (a)–(c) compare Directed Idle and Undirected Idle  

> under the same budget k, with gray segments denoting matched-budget gaps. Panel (d) reports active-token cost in thousands.

is matched, and whether higher budgets continue to expand anticipation recall. Figure 3 reports four endpoints: completion turns, explicit user effort, anticipation recall and active-token cost. 

Cost–efficiency trade-off. Our experiment shows a clear cost–efficiency trade-off rather than a simple “more search is better” trend. At every matched budget, Directed Idle achieves lower T100 and lower User Effort than 

Undirected Idle , indicating that predictive direction improves the utility of idle-time acquisition beyond search volume alone. Increasing k continues to raise Directed Idle ’s Anticipation Recall, from 0.253 at k = 4 to 0.432 at 

k = 16 , but under the finite-scenario setting of ProActEval that extra recall does not guarantee monotonic reductions in User Effort. Once the main predictable needs are covered, additional searches tend to chase lower-marginal or later needs, and each budget setting also induces a different closed-loop trajectory by changing memory contents, push timing, and subsequent dialogue context. As a result, active-token cost rises steadily while T100 and User Effort flatten or fluctuate. Thus, the search budget should be treated as an operating point that balances efficiency gains against compute cost, rather than as a parameter to maximize. Higher Anticipation Recall does not translate linearly into fewer dialogue turns, because end-to-end efficiency can still be constrained by the last uncovered needs, simulator continuation policies, and strong full-context reactive baselines. 

## 6 Conclusion 

We presented ProAct, a proactive agent architecture that uses persistent memory, Future-State Prediction, and Idle-Time Acquisition to convert idle intervals into grounded preparation for likely future needs. Across ProActEval and MemBench, ProAct improves proactive efficiency, coverage, factual integrity, and reflective memory accuracy. Our budget analysis further shows that larger Idle-Time Acquisition budgets raise active-token cost and yield diminishing returns, so proactive computation is an operating-point trade-off rather than something to maximize. 

Limitations. These results come from a closed-world synthetic benchmark, so they should be read as controlled evidence for prediction-guided idle-time compute rather than a deployment guarantee in open-world personal assis-tants. The evaluation also depends on an LLM judge and on a value-aware delivery gate, and proactive preparation can still backfire when it competes with the reactive answer or pushes low-value content. Real deployments would need user controls, rate limits, and ongoing monitoring. 9References 

Thomas De Min, Subhankar Roy, Stéphane Lathuilière, Elisa Ricci, and Massimiliano Mancini. Proactivebench: Benchmarking proactiveness in multimodal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.19466 , 2026. Yang Deng, Wenqiang Lei, Wai Lam, and Tat-Seng Chua. A survey on proactive dialogue systems: Problems, methods, and prospects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02750 , 2023. Suzie Drummond and Paula Brough. Proactive coping and preventive coping: Evidence for two distinct constructs. Personality and Individual Differences , 92:123–127, 2016. Yiming Du, Hongru Wang, Zhengyi Zhao, Bin Liang, Baojun Wang, Wanjun Zhong, Zezhong Wang, and Kam-Fai Wong. Perltqa: A personal long-term memory dataset for memory classification, retrieval, and fusion in question answering. In Proceedings of the 10th SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing (SIGHAN-10) , pages 152–164, 2024. Huan-ang Gao, Jiayi Geng, Wenyue Hua, Mengkang Hu, Xinzhe Juan, Hongzhang Liu, Shilong Liu, Jiahao Qiu, Xuan Qi, Yiran Wu, et al. A survey of self-evolving agents: On path to artificial super intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21046 , 1, 2025. Esther Greenglass. The proactive coping inventory (pci): A multidimensional research instrument. In International Conference of ,1999. Priyanshu Gupta, Shashank Kirtania, Ananya Singha, Sumit Gulwani, Arjun Radhakrishna, Gustavo Soares, and Sherry Shi. Metareflection: Learning instructions for language agents using past reflections. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 8369–8385, 2024. Jiaxiong Hu, Jingya Guo, Ningjing Tang, Xiaojuan Ma, Yuan Yao, Changyuan Yang, and Yingqing Xu. Designing the conversa-tional agent: asking follow-up questions for information elicitation. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , 8 (CSCW1):1–30, 2024. Jiho Kim, Woosog Chay, Hyeonji Hwang, Daeun Kyung, Hyunseung Chung, Eunbyeol Cho, Yohan Jo, and Edward Choi. Dialsim: A real-time simulator for evaluating long-term dialogue understanding of conversational agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13144 ,2024. Lizi Liao, Grace Hui Yang, and Chirag Shah. Proactive conversational agents in the post-chatgpt world. In Proceedings of the 46th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval , pages 3452–3455, 2023. Kevin Lin, Charlie Snell, Yu Wang, Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Sleep-time compute: Beyond inference scaling at test-time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13171 , 2025. Weiwen Liu, Xu Huang, Xingshan Zeng, Xinlong Hao, Shuai Yu, Dexun Li, Shuai Wang, Weinan Gan, Zhengying Liu, Yuanqing Yu, et al. Toolace: Winning the points of llm function calling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.00920 , 2024. Yaxi Lu, Shenzhi Yang, Cheng Qian, Guirong Chen, Qinyu Luo, Yesai Wu, Huadong Wang, Xin Cong, Zhong Zhang, Yankai Lin, et al. Proactive agent: Shifting llm agents from reactive responses to active assistance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12361 , 2024. Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir_G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph_E Gonzalez. Memgpt: towards llms as operating systems. 2023. Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology , pages 1–22, 2023. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:8634–8652, 2023. Haoran Tan, Zeyu Zhang, Chen Ma, Xu Chen, Quanyu Dai, and Zhenhua Dong. Membench: Towards more comprehensive evaluation on the memory of llm-based agents. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 19336–19352, 2025. Bing Wang, Xinnian Liang, Jian Yang, Hui Huang, Shuangzhi Wu, Peihao Wu, Lu Lu, Zejun Ma, and Zhoujun Li. Enhancing large language model with self-controlled memory framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13343 , 2023a. Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 , 2023b. Hongru Wang, Cheng Qian, Manling Li, Jiahao Qiu, Boyang Xue, Mengdi Wang, Heng Ji, and Kam-Fai Wong. Toward a theory of agents as tool-use decision-makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.00886 , 2025. 

10 Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Science , 18(6):186345, 2024. Di Wu, Hongwei Wang, Wenhao Yu, Yuwei Zhang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Dong Yu. Longmemeval: Benchmarking chat assistants on long-term interactive memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10813 , 2024. BY Yan, Chaofan Li, Hongjin Qian, Shuqi Lu, and Zheng Liu. General agentic memory via deep research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.18423 , 2025. Jiaquan Zhang, Chaoning Zhang, Shuxu Chen, Zhenzhen Huang, Pengcheng Zheng, Zhicheng Wang, Ping Guo, Fan Mo, Sung-Ho Bae, Jie Zou, et al. Lightweight llm agent memory with small language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.07798 , 2026. Zeyu Zhang, Quanyu Dai, Luyu Chen, Zeren Jiang, Rui Li, Jieming Zhu, Xu Chen, Yi Xie, Zhenhua Dong, and Ji-Rong Wen. Memsim: A bayesian simulator for evaluating memory of llm-based personal assistants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.20163 , 2024. Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. Memorybank: Enhancing large language models with long-term memory. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 38, pages 19724–19731, 2024. 

11 Appendix 

## A Scenario Anatomy 

Each ProActEval scenario separates runtime-visible information from judge-visible metadata. The fact sheet provides scenario-specific ground truth, while the hidden user-needs graph records key_fact_ids , importance labels, reveal groups, and predictable_after dependencies. The system under test may use the user profile, fact sheet, and conversation history. It does not receive gold user needs, grounding fact IDs, predictability links, or reveal-group annotations. Those fields are used only by the user simulator and coverage judge. This separation is necessary because proactive delivery should be measured against future needs without leaking those needs to the assistant. 

## B Scenario Data Example 

To make the scenario anatomy concrete, we reproduce excerpts from the finance_basic_01 scenario in the financial_-planning domain. The full scenario contains 28 facts and 12 user needs across 8 reveal groups. All entities are fictional. 

User profile. The simulated user is a 23-year-old entry-level analyst who just received their first paycheck and wants simple explanations about saving and investing. 

Fact sheet (excerpt). Each fact is an atomic, verifiable statement with a unique identifier and category label. 

F06 [high_yield_savings_account] The Apex High-Yield Savings account from Apex Digital Bank offers an APY of 4.50%. F07 [high_yield_savings_account] The Apex High-Yield Savings account has no monthly maintenance fees. F14 [index_fund] The G500 fund has an expense ratio of 0.04%, which is an annual fee. F20 [retirement_account_401k] Innovatech Solutions provides a 100% match on 401k contributions up to 4% of pre-tax salary. F26 [retirement_account_401k] Employees can enroll in the 401k plan at any time through the portal: https://my.horizonretirement.com/innovatech. 

User needs (excerpt). Each need specifies its importance level, grounding fact IDs, and predictability chain. The 

predictable_after field defines which earlier need makes this one anticipatable. 

Table 4 Selected user needs from finance_basic_01 . Needs marked with predictable_after can in principle be anticipated after the referenced need is covered. The system under test never sees this metadata.                               

> ID Description Level Key facts Predictable after Reason
> N1 What is my company’s 401k match? must-have F20 ––N2 What is the APY for the Apex HYSA? must-have F06 ––N3 What are the fees and min. deposit for the HYSA? must-have F07, F08 N2 After learning the rate, the user asks about costs to open. N6 How do I enroll in the 401k? must-have F26, F27 N1 Cross-group: learning the match triggers the enrollment question. N9 What is the vesting schedule? nice-to-have F21 N1 Cross-group: the match prompts questions about keeping it.

12 Reveal groups. The 12 needs are organized into 8 reveal groups (e.g., G1: 401k_match_policy → {N1}, G4: 401k_enrollment → {N6}). Groups with a trigger_after dependency (e.g., G4 triggers after G1) model cross-topic anticipation targets: once the user learns about the 401k match (G1), enrollment logistics (G4) and vesting conditions (G6) become predictable. 

## C End-to-End Operational Example 

This section expands the running project-review example from Figure 1 into the concrete pipeline stages used by ProAct. All thresholds and weights below correspond to the implementation defaults: confidence filter θconf = 0 .6,value gate θval = 60 on a 0–100 scale (dividing by 100 gives the normalized score in Section 3.2), scoring weights 

wr = wg = wv = wτ = 0 .25 , push-notification threshold 40, and high-priority push threshold 70. 

Runtime state. Suppose the user asks the assistant to schedule a project review meeting for 10:00 AM the next day. After the scheduling response, the foreground turn is complete and the agent enters an idle window. The runtime-visible state contains the recent request, a persistent memory summary for the project, progress notes from previous turns, a risk log, milestone records, and quantitative status metrics. The system does not know the user’s future request, but the scheduled review and project memory make several future needs predictable. 

Candidate generation. Future-State Prediction generates candidates from two sources: local scenario prediction from the current dialogue (Section 3.3) and related expansion from persistent memory. Memory maintenance may also add candidates for stale or incomplete project knowledge. The implementation returns at most three predictor candidates with confidence at least θconf = 0 .6, while memory-gap candidates are added separately when the memory critic finds missing or weakly supported information. Table 5 shows one possible candidate set for the idle window. Each row corresponds to a predicted need z = ( qz , e z , c z , ρ z ) from the formulation in Section 3.2. 

Table 5 Example candidate future needs generated after the project-review scheduling turn. Columns map to the candidate structure in Section 3.2: Candidate need = qz , Grounding rationale = ez , Conf. = cz , Retrieval plan = ρz .                           

> Candidate need (qz)Source Grounding rationale (ez)Retrieval plan (ρz)Conf. (cz)Prepare executive-style review slides scenario A scheduled project review usually requires a concise progress, risk, and next-step briefing for stakeholders. Retrieve progress notes, risks, mile-stones, metrics, and prior project arti-facts. 0.90 Summarize project risks and block-ers
> scenario Review meetings often require the user to explain un-resolved risks and mitigation status. Retrieve the risk log, blocker updates, owners, and mitigation notes. 0.82 Draft review agenda and checklist related Prior project-management interactions indicate re-peated use of meeting agendas and follow-up check-lists. Retrieve previous agenda formats and current milestone dependencies. 0.72 Refresh missing metric definitions memory_gap The memory critic marks several status metrics as weakly supported or stale. Search or retrieve definitions for veloc-ity, completion rate, and budget vari-ance. 0.70

Acquisition scoring. Idle-Time Acquisition evaluates each candidate using the value score S(z) = wr rz + wg gz +

wv vz + wτ τz from Section 3.2. With equal weights wr = wg = wv = wτ = 0 .25 , the review-slides candidate scores 

S = 0 .25 × 95 + 0 .25 × 80 + 0 .25 × 90 + 0 .25 × 95 = 90 .0, well above the value gate θval = 60 . Candidates below 60 are queued or stored rather than searched immediately. Table 6 shows how the gate turns plausible future needs into concrete acquisition decisions. 

Table 6 Idle-time acquisition scores on the 0–100 scale. S(z) = 0 .25 ( r + g + v + τ ); candidates with S(z) ≥ 60 are eligible for immediate acquisition.                                     

> Candidate Rel. ( r)Gap ( g)Inc. ( v)Time ( τ)S(z)Decision Reason
> Review slides 95 80 90 95 90 search_now Highly tied to the imminent review and likely to save a later cold start. Risk summary 90 75 80 85 83 search_now Useful supporting artifact if idle budget remains after the slide preparation. Agenda checklist 70 35 40 70 54 queue Plausible but mostly covered by prior agenda templates in memory. Metric definitions 55 70 45 50 55 store_only Real memory gap, but only weakly connected to the scheduled review.

Benefit and cost. Downstream benefit is not observed at idle time. ProAct approximates it through the value score S(z) above, and the ProActEval experiments measure it through end-to-end outcomes: proactive delivery of 13 the slide artifact can cover anticipated needs before the user explicitly asks, reducing User Effort (fewer explicit turns) and advancing T100 (faster must-have coverage) by eliminating a future cold-start request. The benefit comes from retrieving evidence early, organizing it into a reusable artifact, and storing provenance for later reuse. The budget cost is the active compute spent by proactive modules, including prediction, value evaluation, evidence search, synthesis, and push scoring. If the idle budget permits only one acquisition, the slide candidate is selected first because it has the highest S(z). If additional budget remains, the risk summary may also be acquired. Lower-scoring candidates remain queued or stored, preventing idle time from degenerating into unconditional background search. 

Artifact generation and delivery. For an accepted candidate, acquisition retrieves or reuses evidence and syn-thesizes a compact artifact with provenance. For the slide candidate, the artifact may contain a stakeholder-ready outline with sections for project status, recent progress, risks, mitigation owners, next steps, chart suggestions, and speaker notes. The delivery policy then selects an action dz ∈ { push , queue , store } by comparing expected infor-mation value against interruption cost. The implementation instantiates the utility-aware gate from Section 3.2 as a push score: 

PushScore = Value − Cost + 50 ,

clipped to [0 , 100] , where Value estimates Ufuture (artifact utility for the user) and Cost estimates Cinterrupt (disruption from delivery). The +50 offset centers neutral cases at 50. Scores above 40 produce a notification ( dz = push ); scores at least 70 are treated as high-priority. When multiple artifacts exceed the push threshold in the same idle window, only the highest-scoring artifact is delivered immediately and the rest are retained as dz = queue . This realizes the three delivery actions in Section 3.2: push corresponds to immediate notification, queue to pending integration in a later response, and store to silent memory storage. Table 7 shows the delivery decisions for this example.                                         

> Table 7 Delivery decisions for artifacts produced from accepted candidates. PushScore =Value −Cost +50 , clipped to [0 ,100] .
> Artifact Value Cost PushScore Action Interpretation
> Executive review slide outline with prove-nance 88 22 100 push The review is imminent, evidence is avail-able, and the artifact can save substantial later work. Risk summary with mitigation owners 76 50 76 queue Exceeds the push threshold (76 >40), but lower-ranked than the slide artifact; re-tained for later integration. Agenda checklist from previous templates 45 60 35 store Below the push threshold (35 <40); stored silently in memory.

This example shows how the formulation in Section 3.2 decomposes into reproducible steps: candidate generation defines what future needs are considered, value scoring determines which candidates consume idle-time budget, acquisition produces grounded artifacts, and delivery scoring controls whether the result should interrupt the user or remain available for later use. 

## D ProActEval Pipeline Trace 

We illustrate the proactive pipeline with a complete trace from the finance_basic_01 scenario (Appendix B). Under the Reactive condition, the assistant completes all 12 needs in 9 turns. Under Directed Idle, the same 12 needs are covered in 6 turns—a 33% reduction—with no coverage loss. 

Turn 1: reactive response with natural anticipation. The user asks about the company’s 401k match. The proactive gate is skipped at Turn 1 due to a minimum-conversation-turn threshold (the predictor requires at least one prior exchange to ground its candidates). However, the assistant’s reactive response naturally covers the employer match (N1, F20) and proactively mentions the enrollment portal (N6, F26–F27) and the vesting schedule (N9, F21). This cross-group anticipation—triggered by the 401k match question but spanning two different reveal groups (G4 and G6)—covers 3 of 12 needs in a single turn, compared with Reactive’s 0/12 after Turn 1. 14 Turn 2: first live pipeline execution. The user asks about the Apex High-Yield Savings APY. After answering, the predictor generates two candidates: (1) “Explore alternative savings or investment options” (confidence 0.71, retrieval: F08, F09) and (2) “Inquire about withdrawal limits and account features” (confidence 0.70, retrieval: F06, F07). Both pass the confidence filter ( ≥ 0.6) and are approved for inline delivery. The assistant weaves facts F06–F09 into the response, covering N2 (APY) reactively and N3 (fees and minimum deposit) proactively. Cumulative coverage rises to 5/12. 

Turns 3–6: continued prediction and delivery. The same pattern repeats at each turn. Table 8 summarizes each turn’s active need, predictions, delivered facts, and cumulative coverage.  

> Table 8

Per-turn pipeline trace for finance_basic_01 under Directed Idle. Pred.: number of candidates generated; Appr.: number approved and delivered inline; Cum. cov.: cumulative needs covered.                                      

> Turn Active need Pred. Appr. Delivered facts (inline) Needs covered Cum. cov.
> 1N1 (401k match) ––Gate skipped (min-turn threshold) N1, N6, N9 (natural) 3/12 2N2 (HYSA APY) 22F08 ($0 min. deposit), F09 (daily compounding), F06 (4.50% APY), F07 (no fees) +N2, +N3 5/12 3N4 (index fund expense ratio) 22F14 (0.04% expense ratio), F15 ($1 minimum), F17 (no account fee) +N4, +N5 7/12 4N7 (401k contribution limit) 22F24 (Traditional + Roth), F22 ($23k limit), F20 (100% match to 4%) +N7, +N8 9/12 5N10 (HYSA withdrawal limits) 21F11 (6 withdrawals/month), F08 ($0 min. de-posit) +N10 10/12 6N11 (brokerage account setup) 22F17 (no opening fee), F15 ($1 min.), F18 (auto dividend reinvest), F24 (Roth option) +N11, +N12 12/12

Comparison with Reactive. Under the Reactive condition, the same 12 needs require 9 user turns because the assistant does not anticipate cross-group needs: N6 (enrollment) and N9 (vesting) each require a dedicated user ques-tion, and intra-group satellite needs (N3, N5, N8) are sometimes bundled by the reactive response but not consistently. The 3-turn saving under Directed Idle comes from two sources: (a) cross-group anticipation in Turn 1 eliminates sep-arate turns for N6 and N9, and (b) inline delivery of satellite facts (e.g., F07–F08 alongside F06 in Turn 2) ensures intra-group needs are consistently bundled. 

## E Metric Definitions 

Let M denote the set of must-have needs, N the set of all needs, and CM (t) the set of must-have needs covered by turn t. Let nconv , ndist , and nhall denote the counts of correctly conveyed facts, distorted facts, and hallucinated claims. 

Tα is the first turn t at which |CM (t)| ≥ ⌈ α · | M |⌉ . We report T80 and T100 . If a condition does not reach the target within the conversation horizon, we assign the horizon plus one. User Effort is the number of turns where the simulator must explicitly ask for an unmet need. If a future need has already been proactively covered, the simulator skips that need and user effort decreases. Fact Accuracy is nconv /(nconv + ndist ). Hallucination Rate is nhall /(nconv + ndist + nhall ).Total Coverage is the fraction of all needs covered by the end of the conversation. Must-Have Coverage is the same fraction restricted to must-have needs. Anticipation Recall is the fraction of predictable needs covered before explicit request. Active Tokens count LLM tokens used by proactive runtime modules: Future-State Prediction, Idle-Time Acquisi-tion, and push scoring. They exclude ordinary reactive response generation, user simulation, coverage judging, and evaluation-only push judging. 

## F Reproducibility Package 

The anonymous supplement provides a single reviewer ZIP, neurips_2026_anonymous_code_release.zip , as the runnable artifact. It contains the 200 ProActEval scenario JSON files, generation and validation scripts, evaluation run-15 ner, simulator, coverage judge, proactive modules, runtime packages, focused tests, run commands, aggregate result summaries, bootstrap confidence intervals, and asset notes. The scenario files contain fictional people, organizations, contact information, URLs, and addresses. No real user data are included. The ProActEval main run can be reproduced from the unpacked ZIP with the commands in RUN_COMMANDS.md . The reported 200-scenario run uses the three conditions in Appendix S: Reactive (Baseline ), Undirected Idle (Blind ), and Directed Idle (Full-single-idle ). The seed is 42, the simulator model is gpt-4o , the coverage judge is 

gpt-4o-mini , the per-search query budget is 1, the per-idle intent limit is 3, and the simulated idle trigger is 5 seconds. The raw canonical result file is 20260426_full200_main/combined/detailed_results.json ; the ZIP records aggregate summaries rather than duplicating the 104 MB trace file. For MemBench, the ZIP includes only the local benchmark adapter and command surface used for Table 14: local inference with Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct on the Table 4 preference and emotion tasks at 10k and 100k context scales. Upstream MemBench data, local result directories, Qwen weights, and checkpoints are not redistributed. 

## G Statistical Reporting 

Table 9 reports paired nonparametric bootstrap 95% confidence intervals over scenarios for the main ProActEval deltas. Each resample draws 200 scenarios with replacement and recomputes the mean paired difference. The inter-vals use 10,000 resamples with seed 2026 and preserve the matched scenario pairing across conditions.    

> Table 9 Paired bootstrap 95% confidence intervals for Directed Idle deltas on 200 ProActEval scenarios. Deltas are signed as Directed Idle minus the comparison condition; negative is better for T80 ,T100 , User Effort, and Hallucination Rate.

# Metric ∆ vs. Reactive ∆ vs. Undirected Idle 

# T80 −1.09 [−1.34 , −0.83 ] −1.07 [−1.36 , −0.79 ]

# T100 −1.20 [−1.45 , −0.96 ] −1.13 [−1.41 , −0.86 ]User Effort −1.07 [−1.27 , −0.87 ] −0.97 [−1.15 , −0.78 ]Total Coverage +0 .064 [+0 .040 , +0 .089 ] +0 .050 [+0 .027 , +0 .075 ]Must-Have Coverage +0 .039 [+0 .020 , +0 .061 ] +0 .027 [+0 .009 , +0 .047 ]Anticipation Recall +0 .428 [+0 .400 , +0 .458 ] +0 .428 [+0 .400 , +0 .458 ]Fact Accuracy +0 .013 [+0 .005 , +0 .020 ] +0 .013 [+0 .005 , +0 .021 ]Hallucination Rate −0.037 [−0.046 , −0.028 ] −0.029 [−0.038 , −0.019 ]

## H Compute and Resource Accounting 

Table 10 reports the compute accounting used for the main experiments. For ProActEval, wall-clock time is the per scenario-condition runtime recorded in the detailed result file, and Active Tokens follow the definition in Appendix E. For MemBench, the local run manifests record the Qwen backend and the Table 4 reflective-memory workloads; the 100k run records 2,323 local model calls and 5.38M total model tokens, while the 10k manifest did not record token totals. The local Qwen runs were executed on an Apple-silicon laptop with a 10-core Apple M5 chip and 16 GB unified memory. 16 Table 10 Compute and resource disclosure for the reported experiments. Active-token counts exclude simulator, reactive response, and evaluation-only judge tokens.                                

> Suite/run Worker/model Items Avg. active tokens / time Notes
> ProActEval Reactive gpt-4o ,gpt-4o-mini API 200 scenarios 0 active tokens; 264.8 s No proactive runtime modules. ProActEval Undirected Idle gpt-4o ,gpt-4o-mini API 200 scenarios 69.8k active tokens; 660.8 s Idle acquisition without future-state prediction. ProActEval Directed Idle gpt-4o ,gpt-4o-mini API 200 scenarios 111.8k active tokens; 687.2 s Full system with prediction, acquisition, and push scor-ing. MemBench reflective 10k Local Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 400 trajectories Token total not recorded Table 4 preference/emotion workload; local backend manifest retained. MemBench reflective 100k Local Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 80 trajectories 5.38M total local model tokens Table 4 preference/emotion workload; 2,323 local model calls.

## I ProactiveAgent Baseline Details 

Table 3 uses a framework-level adaptation of the public ProactiveAgent decision protocol (Lu et al., 2024), not the official finetuned checkpoint. The backbone is GPT-4o. At each turn, the adapter provides the scenario user profile and full fact sheet as event-style observations and asks the model to produce the ProactiveAgent fields Purpose ,

Thoughts , Proactive_Task , Response , and Operation . The prompt therefore exposes all scenario facts at every turn; the comparison tests whether those facts are delivered proactively before an explicit user request. The adapter does not provide gold evaluation metadata such as user_needs , key_fact_ids , predictable_after , or reveal-group annotations. The run covers all 200 scenarios and 1,685 turns, with complete decision traces. The model produced a non-null 

Proactive_Task on 1,173 turns (69.6%), so the low score is not due to a lack of proactive attempts. Instead, the proposed tasks rarely matched benchmark-labeled predictable needs. Under the judge-labeled cross-system metric, ProactiveAgent anticipates 32 of 1,572 predictable needs, while ProAct anticipates 703 of 1,572. The main comparison table reports the scenario-level macro average, giving 0.020 for ProactiveAgent and 0.447 for ProAct; the anticipated-need counts report the corresponding micro aggregates. We therefore use judge-labeled Anticipation Recall for com-parisons with ProactiveAgent and reserve runtime fact-ID-based Anticipation Recall for internal ablations where the system exposes structured delivered facts. 

## J Sentiment and Temporal Query Details 

The memory layer annotates user messages with an emotion label from a seven-class taxonomy: surprise, anger, sadness, joy, fear, neutral, and disgust. It also records an intensity score in [−1, 1] . Given a timestamp query, the sys-tem retrieves messages within a configurable time window and highlights the closest temporal match. This supports queries such as “How was the user feeling around 3pm yesterday?” The incremental extraction pipeline produces structured updates after each turn, including profile_updates for user attributes such as interests, goals, traits, and demographics; updated_summary for a rolling summary that merges historical and new interaction highlights; key_info for factual items from the current turn; user_sentiment for the emotion label and intensity score; and extracted_facts for entities with type, attribute, and relationship annota-tions. These fields are not the main contribution of the paper, but they explain why the memory layer can provide persistent grounding for Future-State Prediction. 

## K Per-Domain Breakdown 

Table 11 reports per-domain ProActEval results across all 40 domains. Each domain contains five scenarios. Rows are sorted by the change in T100 from Reactive to Directed Idle. The strongest domain-level improvements occur in software release management, public library services, parenting support, and financial planning. The few domains with non-negative ∆T100 show why proactive agents require careful delivery gates: additional proactive content can alter the closed-loop trajectory even when final coverage remains high. 17 Table 11 Per-domain ProActEval results over 200 scenarios. ∆T100 is Directed Idle minus Reactive, so negative values indicate faster complete must-have coverage. Ant.R is Directed Idle anticipation recall. 

T100 User Effort Total Coverage 

Domain React. Undir. Direct. ∆ React. Undir. Direct. React. Direct. Ant.R 

software_release 9.8 9.2 6.4 −3.4 10.0 9.6 8.0 .798 .967 .587 

public_library 8.4 8.4 6.0 −2.4 8.8 8.8 7.8 .942 .964 .438 

parenting_support 9.2 8.2 6.8 −2.4 9.6 9.2 7.6 .801 .900 .342 

election_polling 8.8 8.6 6.6 −2.2 9.6 9.4 8.4 .860 .987 .310 

financial_planning 7.2 6.4 5.0 −2.2 9.0 8.0 6.8 .968 .986 .689 

group_travel 7.4 7.8 5.2 −2.2 9.2 8.8 7.8 .959 .987 .609 

music_ensemble 8.0 7.4 5.8 −2.2 9.6 9.0 7.2 .883 1.000 .562 

subscription_admin 9.2 8.4 7.0 −2.2 10.0 9.6 8.2 .796 .947 .504 

project_kickoff 7.4 7.8 5.6 −1.8 9.2 9.2 7.0 .947 1.000 .555 

cybersecurity 9.0 7.8 7.2 −1.8 10.0 9.0 8.0 .759 .922 .364 

compliance 8.8 8.4 7.2 −1.6 9.4 9.6 8.8 .803 .982 .282 

farm_operations 7.4 6.8 5.8 −1.6 8.6 7.8 7.2 .959 1.000 .342 

personal_shopping 7.4 6.6 5.8 −1.6 8.8 8.2 7.6 .983 1.000 .421 

postal_mailroom 8.4 8.2 6.8 −1.6 9.4 9.2 8.2 .915 .967 .471 

research_management 8.6 8.2 7.0 −1.6 9.2 8.6 7.6 .867 1.000 .335 

sports_team 9.6 8.4 8.0 −1.6 9.8 9.6 9.0 .652 .967 .463 

insurance_navigation 8.4 9.0 7.0 −1.4 9.6 9.6 8.0 .887 .947 .382 

vendor_management 8.8 8.8 7.4 −1.4 9.6 9.6 8.6 .883 .955 .527 

animal_shelter 8.2 9.0 6.8 −1.4 8.6 9.2 7.8 .969 1.000 .292 

maritime_vessel 8.0 8.4 6.8 −1.2 9.4 10.0 8.2 .940 .970 .428 

nonprofit_case 8.4 8.8 7.2 −1.2 8.8 9.2 7.6 .858 .929 .613 

product_analysis 7.4 7.2 6.2 −1.2 8.4 8.4 7.8 .966 .985 .542 

study_abroad 8.0 8.0 7.0 −1.0 8.4 8.4 7.8 .907 1.000 .539 

translation 7.2 7.2 6.2 −1.0 8.4 8.6 7.6 .886 .952 .273 

vehicle_ownership 7.0 7.2 6.0 −1.0 9.2 9.0 8.0 1.000 1.000 .333 

home_maintenance 7.4 7.8 6.6 −0.8 9.0 8.6 8.0 .986 .971 .403 

employee_onboarding 6.0 6.8 5.2 −0.8 8.8 9.4 7.6 .951 .965 .497 

health_management 8.6 8.4 7.8 −0.8 8.8 8.8 7.8 .840 .880 .339 

relocation 7.8 8.6 7.0 −0.8 8.8 9.2 7.8 .911 .960 .455 

apartment_renting 7.2 6.8 6.6 −0.6 8.0 8.2 7.8 .920 1.000 .443 

tax_filing 8.0 8.0 7.4 −0.6 9.6 9.4 8.4 .889 1.000 .530 

troubleshooting 6.8 7.2 6.2 −0.6 9.4 8.6 7.4 .947 .965 .556 

disaster_prep 8.4 8.0 8.0 −0.4 9.2 9.2 9.4 .943 .986 .408 

legal_documentation 7.4 7.8 7.0 −0.4 9.4 9.4 9.0 .986 .943 .459 

makerspace 8.8 8.8 8.6 −0.2 8.8 8.8 8.4 .737 .887 .314 

museum_collection 9.0 9.0 9.0 +0 .0 9.6 9.4 9.2 .902 .871 .357 

waste_recycling 8.6 8.4 8.6 +0 .0 9.0 9.4 9.2 .806 .850 .306 

construction_site 8.0 9.2 8.4 +0 .4 9.0 9.8 8.8 .800 .828 .270 

negotiation 9.4 9.4 9.8 +0 .4 9.4 9.4 9.4 .863 .823 .440 

school_transport 7.0 7.2 7.4 +0 .4 8.2 8.4 8.2 1.000 .987 .160 

18 L Example Conversation Traces 

We summarize two representative traces from the latest 200-scenario run. The first shows successful acceleration; the second shows a regression caused by low-value proactive search. 

Case 1: successful acceleration. In insure_denial_language_05 , the user is interpreting an insurance denial and preparing an appeal. Reactive reaches T100 = 11 , user effort 10, and total coverage 0.769. Directed Idle reaches 

T100 = 5 , user effort 7, and total coverage 1.000. The proactive module anticipates 20.0% of predictable needs and surfaces appeal-related information before the user asks for it explicitly.                   

> Table 12 Trace summary for insure_denial_language_05 .
> Condition T100 User Effort Total Cov. Ant.R
> Reactive 11 10 0.769 0.000 Undirected Idle 890.923 0.000 Directed Idle 571.000 0.200

Case 2: regression under proactive exploration. The second trace concerns a museum conservation priority queue, where the user is prioritizing conservation work. Reactive covers all 14 needs with T100 = 6 and total cov-erage 1.000. Directed Idle covers only 7 of 14 needs, with T100 = 11 and total coverage 0.500. The run still records anticipation recall of 0.300, but the proactive trajectory fails to preserve the critical later needs. This illustrates a re-curring failure mode: anticipation recall can improve while end-to-end completion worsens if the pushed information changes the response path or occupies capacity that should have gone to core reactive coverage.                   

> Table 13 Trace summary for museum_conservation_priority_queue_05 .
> Condition T100 User Effort Total Cov. Ant.R
> Reactive 691.000 0.000 Undirected Idle 791.000 0.000 Directed Idle 11 10 0.500 0.300

## M Prompt Templates 

We reproduce the core evaluation prompts used in ProActEval. Dynamic fields such as fact sheets, user profiles, user needs, and conversation history are injected at runtime. The templates shown here are shortened only to remove scenario-specific payloads; the behavioral instructions and output schemas are preserved. 

Coverage Judge 

The coverage judge receives the fact sheet and hidden user-needs list, then evaluates each assistant turn. It is the only component that sees gold need metadata. The assistant under evaluation never receives this prompt.  

> You are a strict evaluation judge for an AI assistant benchmark. Given the [Fact Sheet] and [User Needs List] below, analyze the AI assistant 's response and determine: 1. facts_conveyed - Fact IDs whose information is accurately communicated 2. facts_distorted - Fact IDs mentioned but with errors 3. hallucinated_claims - Claims NOT grounded in Fact Sheet 4. needs_addressed - User needs substantively covered Coverage mode definitions: "reactive": The user explicitly asked about this need in the current turn and the assistant provided substantive

19 factual information from the Fact Sheet. "proactive": The user did NOT ask about this need, but the assistant volunteered substantive factual information. A need is addressed ONLY when the response conveys at least one fact from the need 's key_fact_ids. Generic advice like "contact support" or "check the website" does NOT count. [Fact Sheet] {fact_lines} [User Needs List] {need_lines} Respond in JSON: {"facts_conveyed": [...], "facts_distorted": [...], "hallucinated_claims": [...], "needs_addressed": [{"need_id": "N1", "mode": "..."}]} 

User Simulator 

The user simulator receives the persona and the next target need, but not the fact sheet. This prevents leakage of facts that should be supplied by the assistant. 

You are role-playing as a user in a conversation with an AI assistant. Stay in character and generate natural, realistic messages. Your persona: {persona} Your current situation: {context} Your communication style: {communication_style} Current need to express naturally: {need_description} Rules: - Generate ONLY the user 's message, nothing else. - Keep the message natural and conversational. - Do not mention fact IDs, need IDs, or evaluation metadata. - Include situational context: why you need this now and what prompted the question. - Do NOT copy the need description verbatim. 

Future-State Prediction 

Future-State Prediction runs after the current turn has been answered. Its job is not to retrieve facts for the current answer; it proposes predicted needs for Idle-Time Acquisition. 

Predict likely future information needs after the current turn is answered. Do not predict facts that merely help answer the current user question. Use only runtime-visible information: - current dialogue state - user profile and recent history - memory gaps and previously stored research facts Generate candidates in two classes: 1. NEXT-STEP: immediate follow-up within the current topic 2. ADJACENT: related topic grounded in the user 's longer profile, recent history, or unresolved memory gaps 

20 Rules: - Do not use any benchmark gold labels. - Prefer concrete anchors such as entities, dates, IDs, constraints, and unresolved dependencies. - Assign calibrated confidence. Low-confidence candidates should be filtered before exploration. Return candidate intents with: topic, need, reason, confidence, retrieval_query. 

Idle-Time Acquisition Scoring 

Idle-Time Acquisition scores each predicted intent before spending search budget. The score is used as a gate: plau-sible but low-value candidates are stored or dropped rather than immediately searched. 

Score whether this candidate should receive idle-time exploration. Consider: 1. user relevance 2. current knowledge gap 3. incremental value beyond stored memory 4. timeliness For each candidate, return: - value_score in [0, 1] - relevance_score - knowledge_gap_score - incremental_value_score - timeliness_score - decision in {search_now, queue, store_only, drop} - short rationale High value_score should correspond to information likely to reduce future user effort or improve factual grounding. Do not approve search merely because a topic is related. 

## N MemBench Detailed Results 

Table 14 reports the overall reflective accuracy comparison against published MemBench baselines.  

> Table 14

Overall reflective accuracy on MemBench. Baseline numbers are aggregate reflective accuracy from the published MemBench results. 

Method 10k tokens 100k tokens 

FullMemory 0.733 0.533 RecentMemory 0.700 0.333 RetrievalMemory 0.692 0.833 GenerativeAgent 0.742 0.333 MemoryBank 0.692 0.400 MemGPT 0.733 0.367 SCMemory 0.542 0.267 ProAct 0.843 0.863 

Table 15 presents ProAct’s reflective memory accuracy by scenario type. Table 16 reports memory operation efficiency. Read latency measures time to recall relevant memory for a query; write latency measures time to store a new memory entry. 21 Table 15 ProAct reflective memory accuracy by scenario.                                     

> Scenario 10k tokens 100k tokens
> food 0.94 0.95 book 0.87 0.85 movie 0.80 0.85 emotion 0.76 0.80
> Overall 0.843 0.863
> Table 16 Memory operation efficiency in seconds per operation.
> Method Read Time Write Time
> FullMemory <0.001 <0.001
> RecentMemory <0.001 <0.001
> RetrievalMemory 0.036 0.057 GenerativeAgent 0.028 6.064 MemoryBank 0.033 15.705 MemGPT 1.042 <0.001
> SCMemory 0.036 0.057 ProAct ∼0.04 ∼0.06

## O Failure Mode Analysis 

ProActEval reveals several recurring failure patterns. 

Reactive compatibility regression. In 6 of 200 scenarios (3.0%), Directed Idle has smaller final must-have cov-erage than Reactive. This occurs when proactive context competes with the reactive answer for response budget or shifts generation toward less relevant facts. The largest regressions include recycling_contamination_pattern_-01 , site_subcontractor_handoff_04 , and museum_conservation_priority_queue_05 . The museum conserva-tion trace in Table 13 is an example. 

Precision–recall decoupling. Anticipation can be correct without reducing user effort. Directed Idle records nonzero anticipation recall in 192 of 200 scenarios, but in 82 of those scenarios user effort does not decrease relative to Reactive. If useful information is delivered too late, or if the user would have asked for it in the same turn any-way, anticipation recall improves but user effort does not. This motivates evaluating proactive systems with both anticipation metrics and end-to-end interaction metrics. 

Low-value push pressure. Larger search budgets increase the number of candidate pushes. In the budget-scaling experiment, Directed Idle ( k = 16 ) has greater anticipation recall than Directed Idle ( k = 4 ) but does not mono-tonically improve T100 . Additional searches can introduce low-value pushes, change memory state, and alter the closed-loop conversation trajectory. 

Search direction failure. Undirected Idle shows that idle exploration without prediction spends substantial active-token budget while producing only small gains over Reactive. The failure is not a lack of search alone; it is a lack of direction about which future need the search should serve. 

Opportunity and fragmentation sensitivity. Scenarios with many predictable needs generally provide more room for proactive gains, but topic fragmentation changes how easily the predictor can exploit that headroom. High-opportunity scenarios reduce user effort by 1.48 turns on average, compared with 0.86 turns for medium-opportunity scenarios and 1.10 turns for low-opportunity scenarios. Medium- and low-fragmentation scenarios show larger aver-age gains than high-fragmentation scenarios, suggesting that prediction benefits from coherent local structure rather than many disconnected topic clusters. 22 P Broader Impacts 

Privacy and surveillance risk. Persistent memory and future-need prediction can create privacy risks if applied to real user histories, especially if systems infer sensitive needs or monitor behavior without clear consent. This paper avoids collecting or releasing personal data by using synthetic scenarios, and the system design stores provenance with generated artifacts so that retrieved evidence can be audited. A real deployment should add data minimization, retention controls, access logs, deletion mechanisms, and explicit consent for proactive memory use. 

Potential benefits. When used with appropriate controls, proactive agents can reduce repeated information-seeking effort, help users prepare for foreseeable follow-up tasks, and improve factual grounding by acquiring evidence be-fore a rushed response is needed. These benefits are most plausible in settings where user goals are explicit, evidence sources are auditable, and proactive delivery is gated by user value rather than system engagement. 

## Q Structural Analysis Details 

We stratify scenarios by two construction properties. Proactive opportunity is the fraction of user needs with a 

predictable_after link: high if at least 70%, medium if 55–70%, and low otherwise. Topic fragmentation is the number of reveal groups: high if at least 10 groups, medium if 8–9 groups, and low if at most 7 groups. Table 17 reports Directed Idle minus Reactive user-effort deltas. Negative values indicate fewer explicit user turns.                        

> Table 17 Directed Idle minus Reactive user-effort delta, stratified by proactive opportunity and topic fragmentation. Negative values indicate improvement. n: scenario count.
> Proactive Opportunity Fragmentation High Medium Low High −2.33 (n=3) −0.74 (n=31) −0.42 (n=12) Medium −1.38 (n=21) −0.98 (n=60) −1.47 (n=15) Low −1.46 (n=26) −0.70 (n=20) −1.33 (n=12)

The strongest cell is high opportunity with high fragmentation ( ∆UE = −2.33 ), but it contains only three scenarios and should be interpreted cautiously. The more stable pattern comes from medium-fragmentation scenarios ( n = 96 ), where prediction-guided exploration reduces user effort across all opportunity levels. High-fragmentation scenarios still improve on average, but the gain is smaller ( −0.76 user turns), consistent with the failure mode that disconnected topic clusters make next-need prediction harder. 

## R Per-Archetype Detailed Results 

Table 18 reports per-archetype deltas from Reactive to Directed Idle. Negative deltas indicate improvement for T100 ,user effort, and hallucination.                              

> Table 18 Per-archetype Reactive to Directed Idle deltas over 200 scenarios.
> Archetype ∆T100 ∆UE ∆Halluc. ∆Cov. 01: Foundational Memory −1.40 −1.15 −0.029 +0 .032
> 02: Translation and Gap Resolution −0.95 −0.93 −0.035 +0 .071
> 03: Trace and Dependency Reasoning −1.48 −1.05 −0.048 +0 .106
> 04: Handoff and Consistency Control −1.00 −1.15 −0.045 +0 .020
> 05: Readiness and Follow-through −1.18 −1.05 −0.028 +0 .090
> All −1.20 −1.07 −0.037 +0 .064

Trace and Dependency Reasoning benefits most in convergence speed, consistent with the hypothesis that explicit causal and temporal chains provide strong prediction anchors. Handoff and Consistency Control shows the largest user-effort reduction, suggesting that topic transitions create useful windows for proactive preparation. 23 S Ablation Condition Details 

The main ProActEval experiments use three conditions. Reactive disables both Future-State Prediction and Idle-Time Acquisition. Undirected Idle enables Idle-Time Acquisition but replaces predictive direction with unguided background intents. Directed Idle enables both modules. The budget-scaling experiment uses the same distinction at fixed search budgets k ∈ { 4, 8, 12 , 16 }. Directed Idle ( k)and Undirected Idle ( k) are matched by budget, so their difference estimates the value of predictive direction under comparable search volume. 

## T Asset and License Notes 

Table 19 summarizes assets reused or introduced by this work. We credit the creators of reused benchmarks, protocols, and models, and the anonymous supplement includes a corresponding LICENSES.md with asset URLs, licenses or terms, and dependency sources. The supplement does not redistribute MemBench data or code, ProactiveAgent checkpoints, Qwen weights, OpenAI model weights, or third-party package source trees; those assets remain under their original providers’ terms. 

Table 19 Assets, sources, and license status used by the paper and supplement.                       

> Asset Use Source License or terms status
> ProActEval New synthetic benchmark and scenario files This work and anonymous sup-plement Original synthetic asset from this work; no existing dataset is repackaged. MemBench Reflective memory benchmark and published baselines https://github.com/ import-myself/Membench README-declared MIT license; up-stream data and code are cited but not redistributed. ProactiveAgent Prompting protocol baseline https://github.com/thunlp/ ProactiveAgent Apache-2.0 repository license; protocol fields adapted and credited, with no checkpoint redistribution. Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct Local MemBench backbone https://huggingface.co/Qwen/ Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct Apache-2.0 model license; model weights are not redistributed. OpenAI API models ProActEval simulator, assistant, and judge calls OpenAI API Governed by OpenAI API and service terms; used through API calls only. Python dependencies Experiment execution and local Qwen run-time
> requirements.txt and supple-ment LICENSES.md
> Direct packages are listed in the arti-fact; package-specific licenses should be checked from package metadata or up-stream repositories in the reproduction environment.

## U Knowledge Deduplication Algorithm 

New knowledge passes through three stages: exact hash matching, vector near-duplicate search, and LLM arbitration. The arbitration step decides whether to skip, replace, or merge content. Merged records preserve provenance through 

merged_into and merged_from pointers. 24 Algorithm 1 Knowledge Lifecycle: Multi-Level Deduplication 

Require: New knowledge item k with content c 

> 1:

h ← SHA256 (c) 

> 2:

if h ∈ HashIndex then  

> 3:

return DUPLICATE  

> 4:

end if  

> 5:

N ← VectorSearch (c, δ, k = 1)  

> 6:

if N̸ = ∅ then  

> 7:

decision ← LLM_Arbitrate (k, N [0])  

> 8:

if decision = skip then  

> 9:

return SKIPPED  

> 10:

else if decision = replace then  

> 11:

Update N [0] with content of k 

> 12:

return REPLACED  

> 13:

else if decision = merge then  

> 14:

k′ ← LLM_Merge (k, N [0])  

> 15:

Mark N [0] .status ← MERGED  

> 16:

Store k′ with provenance pointers  

> 17:

return MERGED  

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

Store k in VectorStore and KnowledgeIndex  

> 21:

return ADDED 

## V ProActEval Composition Statistics 

Figure 4 summarizes four properties of ProActEval: needs per scenario, facts per scenario, macro-domain coverage, and predictability structure. 25 10 11 12 13 14 15 

0

10 

20 

30 

40 40 

36 

33 

26 

30 

35 

Number of needs per scenario 

> Number of scenarios

(a) Needs per scenario 

Mean = 12.4 

Median = 12.0 

26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

29 30 

44 

40 

29 

21 

5

2

Number of facts per scenario 

> Number of scenarios

(b) Facts per scenario 

Mean = 30.6 

Median = 30.0 

(c) Macro-domain coverage 

Personal Life & Family 

Work & Organization 

Operations, Safety & Environment 

Education, Public Service & Culture 

Travel, Transport & Mobility 

25% 

25% 20% 

18% 

12% 

0 250 500 750 1,000 1,250 1,500 1,750 

Predictable needs 

Non-predictable needs 

Cross-group links 

Intra-group links 

Auditable proactive targets 

Nice-to-have auditable targets 

1,572 

903 

887 

685 

702 

300 

Count 

(d) Predictability structure Figure 4 Composition statistics of ProActEval. Panel (a) reports needs per scenario, panel (b) reports fact-sheet size, panel (c) summarizes macro-domain coverage, and panel (d) reports predictability structure. The benchmark combines broad domain coverage with explicit proactive headroom. 

26