Title: Self-Evolving Visual Questioner

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.13929v1

Published Time: Mon, 15 Jun 2026 00:20:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Self-Evolving Visual Questioner 

## Yijun Liang 1 Hengguang Zhou 2 Ming Li 1 Lichen Li 3 Cho-Jui Hsieh 2,4 Tianyi Zhou 51University of Maryland, College Park 2University of California, Los Angeles 

> 3

## Peking University 4Arena 5MBZUAI 

## Abstract 

Vision-language models (VLMs) are typically trained as passive answerers, while their ability to actively ask diverse, non-trivial, visual-centric and grounded questions remains underexplored. Existing visual questioners’ performance is bottlenecked by the availability of high-quality training data or the cost of curating them. We show that a VLM can con-tinuously improve itself as a visual questioner without any external supervision. We propose a self-evolving framework that uses a VLM itself as both a proposer and a filter to produce harder, more informative, and visual-centric questions, while maintaining their exploration diversity to avoid training collapse. These questions are then used to train the VLM in both questioner and answerer modes. To evaluate the ques-tioner, we introduce an agentic protocol that assesses questions along perception, reasoning, and diversity dimensions. Experiments across various backbone VLMs show that our method substantially enhances the quality and substantially expands the difficulty boundary of autonomous question generation. Under the same budget, our self-supervision is more effective than training on the static source data. Moreover, the self-evolving questioner remains a competitive or even better answerer 1.

## 1 Introduction 

Vision-language models (VLMs) have achieved substan-tial progress on visual question answering, multimodal instruction following, and visual reasoning benchmarks. However, most existing VLMs are trained and evaluated primarily as passive answerers: questions are treated as fixed inputs provided by humans, curated datasets, or stronger external models, and learning focuses on producing better answers (Liu et al., 2023; Wu and Xie, 2024; Zhang et al., 2026). This leaves the complemen-tary ability to ask informative and visually grounded questions comparatively underexplored. We view visual 

> 1Project is available at this link.

questioning as a fundamental capability for intelligent systems: it reflects whether a model can actively inspect an image, identify informative visual evidence, and for-mulate questions that require meaningful perception and reasoning. Since this capability is expressed through the questions a model generates, question quality pro-vides a concrete lens for studying how well a model can inspect image content, ground visual evidence, and pose reasoning-oriented queries. Better visual questions can further expose richer evidence and reasoning paths, making them valuable supervision for improving visual questioning itself. Despite its importance, existing visual question gen-eration (VQG) methods remain fundamentally bottle-necked by static data distributions (Mi et al., 2024; Shen et al., 2024). Many approaches rely on human annota-tions, curated datasets, or stronger external models to provide supervision and consequently learn primarily to imitate existing question patterns (Zhao et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2025b; Zhang et al., 2025a). As a result, the diversity, grounding quality, and reasoning complex-ity of generated questions are largely bounded by the underlying data distribution. Generated questions of-ten concentrate on repetitive templates, salient objects, and surface-level recognition, and may not require care-ful inspection of image-specific visual evidence. This leads to shallow image exploration and limited percep-tual reasoning. To sustain improvement, supervision that can keep expanding toward broader, harder, and more visually grounded questions are needed. How-ever, continuously collecting such question annotations from humans or stronger external models is expensive, difficult to scale, and challenging to control. To move beyond this bottleneck, a natural alterna-tive is to allow the model itself to autonomously con-struct better supervision through self-generated ques-tions. However, simple scaling self-generated supervi-sion does not automatically lead to self-improvement. Without mechanisms that explicitly preserve exploration diversity, improve difficulty, and ensure visual ground-ing, the model may reinforce its own biases and collapse toward repetitive, low-information, or weakly grounded questions. Consequently, the key challenge is not merely generating more questions, but sustaining the continual evolution of questioning capability while progressively 1

> arXiv:2606.13929v1 [cs.CV] 11 Jun 2026

expanding diversity and reasoning difficulty throughout training. To address this challenge, we propose a self-evolving visual questioner framework that enables a VLM to improve itself as a visual questioner, without human an-notations, external teacher models, or auxiliary reward models. Rather than relying on continuously collected datasets, our framework uses the current model itself to iteratively construct progressively stronger supervision from unlabeled images. Given an image, the model first proposes candidate questions under multiple vi-sual intents to encourage broader coverage of the space for all potential questions. It then applies a rewrite and filtering procedure to select question-answer candi-dates that are more visually grounded, more informative, and more reasoning-oriented while preserving diversity across question types. Unlike conventional self-training, which largely reinforces existing prediction distribu-tions and risks collapse toward narrow behaviors, our framework is inherently exploratory, continually evolv-ing the question distribution toward greater diversity, stronger visual grounding, and richer reasoning com-plexity. The selected data are used for dual-format train-ing with both QG-format and QA-format supervision, enabling the model to improve its questioning behavior while maintaining its answering ability. The trained model is then reused as the proposer in the next round, forming a closed-loop self-improvement framework for visual questioning that can produce increasingly diverse, difficult, and visual-centric supervision from the same unlabeled image pool over iterative rounds. To evaluate visual questioning capability beyond con-ventional QA accuracy, we introduce an agentic evalu-ation protocol that assesses generated questions along perception, reasoning, and diversity dimensions. Ex-periments across multiple VLM backbones show that our self-evolving framework substantially improves the visual-centric quality of generated questions while largely preserving QA performance. After two self-evolving rounds, the average QG score increases by 

∼82% relative to the initial base model. The generated questions become better at searching for informative vi-sual evidence and covering broader image content, while also showing stronger contextual and spatial reasoning. In particular, our proposal-and-filter mechanism effec-tively maintains exploration diversity and visual-centric reasoning throughout self-evolution, mitigating the de-generation toward repetitive and shallow questioning behaviors commonly observed in static or unconstrained self-generated supervision. While our primary goal is not to optimize downstream VQA performance, QA accuracy remains stable and even improves on several benchmarks, suggesting that the model becomes a stronger visual questioner without sacrificing its answering capability. Ablations on super-vision format, supervision source, and filtering strategy further show that our generated data provides a more effective small-budget training signal than directly sam-pled source annotations. These results suggest that con-trolled self-evolution can produce increasingly diverse, difficult, and visually grounded questions, providing more informative supervision for VLM training without relying on continuously collected external annotations. 

Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We introduce a fully autonomous self-evolving framework for visual question generation, where a VLM continuously improves its questioning capa-bility using only self-generated training data. • We propose a multi-round generating, rewriting, and filtering mechanism that promotes diversity, difficulty, and visual grounding while preventing degeneration during recursive self-training. • We introduce a structured agentic evaluation proto-col that measures visual-centric questioning quality across perception, reasoning, and diversity dimen-sions, enabling fine-grained analysis beyond aggre-gate QA accuracy. • We conduct extensive experiments and ablations across multiple models, text, and image sources, and filtering strategies, demonstrating the effective-ness and robustness of our framework. 

## 2 From Answerer to Questioner 

2.1 Overview 

We study whether a vision-language model (VLM) can improve its visual question generation (QG) ability from its own generated data while preserving downstream visual question answering (QA) performance. Given an image collection I and an initial model M0, our goal is to construct visual-centric question-answer data that improves the model’s ability to generate diverse, grounded, and reasoning-oriented questions. Our framework consists of two stages. First, the model proposes candidate questions, rewrites them into harder visual-centric questions, and filters candidates based on answerability, visual grounding, and percep-tion/reasoning difficulty. Second, the retained question-answer pairs are used for dual-format training: QA-format supervision anchors answering behavior, while QG-format supervision teaches the model to generate both questions and answers. The adapted model can be reused as the new question proposer int he next round, forming an iterative self-improvement loop over the same unlabeled image pool. For analysis, we intro-duce an agentic visual questioning capability evaluation protocol that measures generated questions along per-ception, reasoning, and diversity dimensions. 

2.2 Problem Formulation 

A visual QA example consists of an image x, a question 

q, and an answer a. Standard VQA training optimizes the conditional answer distribution: 

pθ (a | x, q ). (1) 2Current 

> Model

Mt

> Updated
> Model

Mt+1   

> Self-Refined Supervision Construction
> Q Proposal Q Rewriting Q Filtering
> Dual-Format Training
> QG-format Data
> Img → Q + A
> QA-format Data
> Img +Q → A

+

> By current model

Mt

> Question Proposal
> 1
> Q: What is the color of the table? A: Blue.
> Q: Where is the cup in the image? A: On the table.
> By Base model

M0

> Question Rewriting
> 2
> Q: Which object has a darker color, the desk or the lamp? A: The desk.
> Q: What visual evidence supports that room is used for study? A: Notebook on table.
> By Base model

M0      

> Filtering 3
> Answerable (Correct & specific)
> Filtering Criteria
> Improved Perception
> Improved Reasoning
> D(t) ={( Img ,Q,
> A)} N
> Self-Supervision Data
> Use Mt+1 as the next question proposal
> Image Sets
> Visual Intents
> Attribute Recognition Spatial Relations Grounded Reasoning
> ...
> D(t) ={( Img ,Q,
> A)} N
> Self-Supervision Data

Figure 1: Overview of our self-evolving visual questioner framework. Given unlabeled image sets and visual-intent prompts, the current model Mt first proposes candidate questions. A stable base model M0 then rewrites and filters these proposals to construct self-supervision data D(t) with improved answerability, perception difficulty, and reasoning difficulty. The refined supervision is used for dual-format training with both QG-format and QA-format objectives, producing an updated model Mt+1 . The updated model is reused as the proposer in the next round, forming an iterative self-improvement loop. In contrast, visual question generation requires the model to produce an informative question conditioned on the image and control information. We formulate QG as learning: 

pθ (q | x, c ), (2) where c denotes optional conditioning information such as a target question type, answer style, or reasoning in-tent. In our framework, such intents encourage broader coverage of the per-image question space; when no con-trol is provided, the model generates questions directly from the image. 

2.3 Agentic Questioning Capability Evaluation Protocol 

A central challenge in evaluating visual questions is that surface-level quality does not necessarily reflect visual informativeness. A question may be well-formed but shallow, ambiguous, weakly grounded in the im-age, or redundant with other questions for the same image. We therefore design an evaluation protocol to assess whether generated questions are visual-centric, challenging, and diverse. Our protocol evaluates generated questions at two levels. At the individual-question level, we measure 

perception difficulty and reasoning difficulty . Percep-tion difficulty concerns what visual evidence must be identified to answer the question, and consists of two di-mensions: Visual Search Difficulty , which measures how difficult it is to locate the required evidence, and Visual Evidence Coverage , which measures how broadly the question depends on evidence across the image. Rea-soning difficulty concerns how the identified evidence must be interpreted, and consists of two dimensions: 

Visual Context Reasoning , which measures contextual interpretation from visible cues, and Visual Spatial Rea-soning , which measures reasoning over spatial relations among image elements. At the question-set level, we measure diversity 

through Questioning Diversity , which captures redun-dancy among questions generated for the same image. This set-level dimension is important because a question can be valid and reasoning-oriented in isolation, yet pro-vide little additional supervision if it is a near-duplicate of other questions for the same image. For individual-question evaluation, we use a GPT-based judge with clearly defined rubrics for the four perception and reasoning dimensions. The judge scores each question conditioned on the image, allowing the evaluation to focus on visual evidence and reasoning requirements rather than surface-level wording. For question-set diversity, we use a sentence embedding model to compute semantic distances among questions generated for the same image, measuring whether the question set provides non-redundant visual supervision. Detailed rubrics and diversity computation are provided in Appendix A. 

## 3 Self-Evolving Visual Questioner 

Our framework consists of two stages: self-supervision data construction and dual-format model training, aim-ing to improve the VLM’s questioning capability while preserving its answering ability. Given unlabeled im-ages, the same VLM is used throughout the data-generation process under different roles: it proposes 3candidate questions, rewrites them into harder and more visual-centric questions, and filters the candidates based on visual answerability and perception/reasoning diffi-culty. This refinement prevents the raw proposals from being used directly for training and mitigates collapse toward repetitive or low-information questions. Impor-tantly, this rewriting-and-filtering procedure is used only during self-evolution training. During evalua-tion, we directly assess the model’s unmodified gener-ated questions without additional rewriting or filtering, ensuring that the reported results reflect the model’s intrinsic questioning capability. The resulting self-generated and self-refined supervision requires neither external teachers nor human annotations, since it is gen-erated, improved, and selected by the model itself. The retained question-answer pairs are then used for dual-format training, enabling the model to improve question generation while maintaining its answering ability. 

3.1 Question Proposal 

For each image xi ∈ I , the current model Mt first proposes a set of candidate questions: 

Qprop  

> i

= {qprop  

> i, 1

, . . . , q prop  

> i,K

}. (3) Here Mt can be either the initial model M0 or a model adapted in a previous self-evolution round. The proposal prompt asks the model to generate questions that are answerable from the image and grounded in visible evidence. The answers are then generated by Mt based on image xi and proposal qprop  

> i

.To construct a diverse proposal pool, we prompt the model with multiple question intents, such as direct recognition, comparison, spatial relations, scene under-standing, and grounded reasoning. These intents encour-age the model to cover different aspects of the image and reduce the tendency to produce shallow or repetitive question templates. For each proposed question, we use the same model to generate the corresponding answer, forming an initial set of question-answer proposal triples: 

Cprop  

> t

= {(xi, q prop  

> i,j

, a prop  

> i,j

)}i,j . (4) These proposal triples serve as the starting candidates for the subsequent rewrite and filtering stages. 

3.2 Question Rewriting 

A key design choice in our framework is to separate question proposal from question rewriting. The current checkpoint Mt serves as the evolving proposer: as it is trained across rounds, it becomes increasingly special-ized in direct visual question generation and changes proposal distribution over the image collection. This changing distribution allows later rounds to explore new candidate supervision. The rewriting step then refineds these proposals along specified visual-centric directions, such as increasing visual inspection difficulty, evidence grounding, contextual reasoning, or spatial reasoning. However, using the same adapted checkpoint to rewrite its own proposals would tightly couple pro-posal and refinement, causing both steps to follow the same generation distribution. We therefore instantiate rewriting with the initial checkpoint M0, which acts as the model’s pre-adaptation question-evolution op-erator. This introduces a different perspective into the data-construction process, adding useful exploration and diversity without external supervision. In this design, 

Mt determines what questions are explored, while M0

adds variation to the rewriting process. Given an image x, a question proposal qprop , and an evolution instruction r, the rewriting operator produces an evolved question: 

qrw ∼ M0(· | x, q prop , r ). (5) Instruction r specifies the intended difficulty direction, e.g., increasing visual inspection difficulty, evidence grounding, contextual reasoning, or spatial reasoning. The rewritten question is paired with answer arw gen-erated by M0 conditioned on image x and rewritten question qrw : This forms a rewritten candidate: 

Crw  

> t

= {(xi, q rw  

> i,j

, a rw  

> i,j

)}i,j . (6) The resulting rewritten candidates are then passed to the filtering stage in Section 3.3. 

3.3 Question Filtering 

The rewritten candidate pool Crw  

> t

contains questions with varying validity, specificity, and difficulty. Be-fore training, we therefore apply a model-based filtering step to retain only useful supervision. For each rewrit-ten candidate (x, q rw , a rw ), the model compares it with its corresponding proposal triple (x, q prop , a prop ) and checks whether the rewritten QA pair remains visually answerable, grounded in image, and more challenging than the original proposal. The filtering rule retains candidates that are visually valid and improve over their proposals in either percep-tion or reasoning difficulty. Specifically, we discard candidates that are ambiguous, weakly grounded, visu-ally unanswerable, or not improved over the original proposal. The retained candidates form the training dataset D(t) used in the following training stage. 

3.4 Training and Iterative Self-Improvement 3.4.1 Dual-Format Supervision 

After filtering process, the retained question-answer pairs are used to adapt the VLM. Our training stage mixes two supervision formats: QG-format supervision and QA-format supervision. The QG-format presents only the image as input and trains the model to gen-erate both the question and its corresponding answer, encouraging the model to generate visual-centric ques-tions grounded in answerable image evidence. The QA-format presents the image and question as input and trains the model to generate the answer, anchoring 4the model’s answering behavior and helping preserve downstream VQA ability. Formally, given the retained dataset 

D(t) = {(xi, q i, a i)}Ni=1 , (7) we construct two training set: 

D(t)QG = {xi → (qi, a i)}Ni=1 , (8) 

D(t)QA = {(xi, q i) → ai}Ni=1 . (9) The final training set is the mixture of these sets: 

D(t)train = D(t)QG ∪ D (t)QA . (10) We train the model with standard supervised fine-tuning on the target tokens in both formats. This improves question generation while maintaining the model’s an-swering ability. 

3.4.2 Iterative Self-Improvement 

Given D(t)train , we fine-tune the current model Mt to obtain Mt+1 . In the one-round setting, the initial model M0 generates and filters candidate data, and the retained dataset is used to train M1. For iterative self-improvement, the adapted model is reused as the proposer in the next round: producing a new set of question proposals. These proposals are then rewritten and filtered by M0, and the resulting mixed-format supervision is used to train the next model. This forms a self-improvement loop: 

Mt → D (t)train → Mt+1 . (11) Overall, our method improves QG through the inter-action of rewriting, filtering, and dual-format training. Rewriting expands the candidate pool toward harder and more visual-centric questions, Filtering removes invalid or non-improving generations, and dual-format super-vision improves question generation while anchoring answering behavior. Together, these components enable the model to improve visual question generation while maintaining competitive downstream QA performance. 

## 4 Experiments 

In this section, we evaluate whether our self-evolving visual questioner framework improves question genera-tion (QG) quality while preserving question answering (QA) performance. Our experiments address four questions: • Can our self-evolving framework improve QG quality within a single round? • Does iterative self-improvement further improve QG quality across rounds? • How do the effects vary across different genera-tions and training settings? • Does improved question quality provide more ef-fective supervision for downstream QA training? 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

We evaluate our self-evolving questioner framework on three VLM backbones: Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct, Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct (Bai et al., 2025b), and Qwen3VL-4B-Instruct (Bai et al., 2025a). Implementa-tion details and training hyperparameters are provided in Appendix C. We report results at three stages. Base denotes the original pretrained VLM. First-round denotes the model adapted with supervision constructed in the first round. Second-round denotes the model adapted with supervision constructed by reusing the first-round model as the question proposer. Unless otherwise specified, training uses 10 K examples and the QA+QG format described in Section 3.4. To evaluate QG ability, each model generates 5 ques-tions per image using the same decoding parameters. We then apply the visual questioning capability evalu-ation protocol described in Section 2.3. For the four individual-question dimensions, we use GPT-5.4 (Singh et al., 2026) as an image-conditioned judge. The judge receives the image and one generated question at a time, without access to the model identity. Each dimension is scored on a 0–5 rubric and normalized to [0 , 1] . We first average scores over questions for each image and then average over images. Questioning diversity is computed within the generated question set for each image using Qwen3-Embedding-4B (Zhang et al., 2025b). Specifically, we evaluate QG on a held-out set of 100 diverse natural images sampled from CVBench. We report five dimensions: Visual Search Difficulty (Search ), Visual Evidence Coverage ( Coverage ), Vi-sual Context Reasoning ( Context ), Visual Spatial Rea-soning ( Spatial ), and Questioning Diversity ( Diversity ). To evaluate downstream answering ability, we test mod-els on CVBench (Tong et al., 2024), SparBench (Zhang et al., 2026), VStarBench (Wu and Xie, 2024), and Re-alWorldQA (xAI, 2024). We report accuracy on each benchmark and the average accuracy across all bench-marks. 2

4.2 Main Results 

Table 1 reports dimension-level QG evaluation results together with downstream QA performance. 

Our framework improves questioning while preserv-ing answering ability. According to Table 1, our self-evolving questioner framework consistently im-proves QG quality among all evaluated dimensions and model backbones. The gains are observed not only for Qwen2.5-VL models, but also for the stronger Qwen3VL-4B baseline, which already starts with rela-tively high QG scores. This suggests that the proposed generation, rewriting, and filtering process can further improve the model’s ability to generate visual-centric, grounded, and reasoning-oriented questions even when 

> 2Detailed benchmark accuracies are provided in Ap-pendix 8.

5Backbone Training stage QG Dimension Scores QG Avg. QA Avg. Search Coverage Context Spatial Diversity                                                                         

> Qwen2.5-VL-3B Base 0.26 0.39 0.30 0.03 0.28 0.25 60.49 Qwen2.5-VL-3B First-round 0.43 0.55 0.55 0.37 0.35 0.45 62.26 Qwen2.5-VL-3B Second-round 0.49 0.61 0.64 0.40 0.37 0.50 62.56
> Qwen2.5-VL-7B Base 0.25 0.35 0.27 0.11 0.32 0.26 65.90 Qwen2.5-VL-7B First-round 0.46 0.57 0.59 0.35 0.38 0.47 67.02
> Qwen2.5-VL-7B Second-round 0.51 0.59 0.64 0.40 0.40 0.51 66.90 Qwen3VL-4B Base 0.38 0.51 0.45 0.18 0.26 0.36 71.31
> Qwen3VL-4B First-round 0.52 0.63 0.62 0.54 0.38 0.54 71.12 Qwen3VL-4B Second-round 0.56 0.64 0.65 0.57 0.43 0.57 71.11

Table 1: QG and QA performance of VLMs trained by our framework . Since we target visual question generation, this table mainly focuses on reporting fine-grained QG scores (normalized to [0 , 1] ) while providing average QA accuracy (on five benchmarks) to measure our method’s effects on QA performance. Our method consistently improves QG quality across all evaluated backbones, while maintaining competitive QA performance. the base model is already strong. Importantly, these QG improvements do not come at the cost of downstream an-swering ability. Fine-tuning on a small-scale dataset can shift a VLM away from its original answering behavior, especially when the supervision focuses on a new gen-eration format. Under our dual-format training setup, however, 10 K self-supervision examples are sufficient to improve QG quality without degrading downstream QA performance. 

Iterative self-improvement enables continued QG improvement. Beyond one-round adaptation, Table 1 shows that QG quality continues to improve across rounds. The first round improves all five QG dimen-sions over the base model, and the second round further improves upon the first round. This suggests that the framework is not merely exploiting a one-time benefit from generated supervision; instead, the adapted model produces stronger question proposals in later rounds, which are further refined through rewriting and filtering. By reusing the same unlabeled image pool, the frame-work progressively reshapes the generated question dis-tribution toward broader coverage, stronger grounding, and higher perception/reasoning difficulty. These results support our central goal of improving visual question generation across rounds while maintaining competitive answering performance. 

4.3 Ablation Studies 

We next ablate the supervision format, supervision type, and filtering process to identify which components drive these improvements. 

4.3.1 Effect of Supervision Format 

Table 2 studies the effect of supervision format while keeping the retained self-generated examples fixed. We compare QA-only training, QG-only training, and the proposed QA+QG dual-format training. QA-only trains the model to answer generated questions, QG-only trains the model to generate question-answer pairs from the image, and QA+QG combines both formats. QG-only generally improves QG scores over QA-only, showing that explicit image-to-question-answer supervision strengthens question generation. However, QG-only can reduce downstream QA performance, indi-cating that training only in the QG format may shift the model away from its answering behavior. QA+QG pro-vides the best overall trade-off: it improves QG average over QA-only across all three backbones, while achiev-ing the best or comparable QA performance. These re-sults support our dual-format design, where QG-format supervision improves visual question generation and QA-format supervision helps preserve downstream an-swering ability. 

4.3.2 Effect of Self-Evolution and Filtering 

Table 3 ablates the effects of rewriting and filtering in Qwen2.5-VL-3B setting. Starting from direct self-generated supervision, the model already improves over the base model on visual search, evidence coverage, contextual reasoning, and spatial reasoning, showing that generated question-answer pairs can provide a use-ful signal for improving QG. Adding rewriting further strengthens all five QG dimensions, suggesting that rewriting expands the candidate pool toward harder and more visual-centric questions. The full pipeline achieves the strongest QG perfor-mance across all dimensions. Compared with using rewriting alone, adding filtering improves visual search from 0.353 to 0.433, evidence coverage from 0.520 to 0.547, contextual reasoning from 0.507 to 0.553, spatial reasoning from 0.293 to 0.367, and diversity from 0.320 to 0.350. This indicates that filtering does more than remove invalid samples: it selects candidates that better match our desired QG properties, including stronger grounding, higher perception/reasoning difficulty, and lower redundancy. Together, these results show that rewriting and filtering play complementary roles: rewrit-ing expands the candidate pool, while filtering selects higher-quality supervision for training. 6Backbone Setting QG Dimension Scores QG Avg. QA Avg. Search Coverage Context Spatial Diversity                                                                

> Qwen2.5-VL-3B QA-only 0.37 0.48 0.37 0.25 0.37 0.37 62.40
> QG-only 0.39 0.53 0.43 0.35 0.35 0.41 60.52 QA+QG 0.43 0.55 0.55 0.37 0.35 0.45 62.26 Qwen2.5-VL-7B QA-only 0.45 0.48 0.38 0.28 0.35 0.39 66.57 QG-only 0.48 0.57 0.56 0.33 0.36 0.46 65.83 QA+QG 0.46 0.57 0.59 0.35 0.38 0.47 67.02
> Qwen3VL-4B QA-only 0.47 0.57 0.47 0.37 0.33 0.44 70.38 QG-only 0.51 0.61 0.59 0.54 0.35 0.52 70.12 QA+QG 0.52 0.63 0.62 0.54 0.38 0.54 71.12

Table 2: Effect of supervision format on QG quality and QA performance . We compare QA-only, QG-only, and joint QA+QG supervision under matched settings. QG-only training improves question-generation quality over QA-only training, but can reduce average QA performance. In contrast, joint QA+QG supervision generally achieves strong QG dimension scores while maintaining or improving average QA accuracy. These results suggest that QG-format supervision is important for improving visual questioning capability, while QA-format supervision helps preserve answering performance during adaptation.                                     

> Generation Process QG Dimension Scores QG Avg. Rewriting Filtering Search Coverage Context Spatial Diversity
> ––0.26 0.39 0.30 0.03 0.28 0.25
> ✗✗0.31 0.50 0.47 0.20 0.26 0.35
> ✓✗0.35 0.52 0.51 0.29 0.32 0.40
> ✓✓0.43 0.55 0.55 0.37 0.35 0.45

Table 3: Effect of rewriting and filtering procedures in the generation process . All generated-data variants improve QG quality over the base model. Adding rewriting improves all QG dimensions, and the full pipeline with both rewriting and filtering achieves the strongest overall QG performance, especially on reasoning-related dimensions. QG Avg. is computed as the average over Search, Coverage, Context, Spatial, and Diversity. 

4.3.3 Effect of Self-Supervision Data 

Table 4 compares different sources of question-answer supervision under the same SAT image source, QA+QG training format, and training budget of 10 K examples. We compare directly sampled Original SAT annotations with our self-supervision data, which is constructed through the proposed rewriting and filtering process. Although the original SAT is a large-scale instruction-tuning dataset constructed from image-based rubrics, directly sampling a small subset of its annotations is not the most effective choice in this setting. In our setting, Original SAT improves visual search difficulty, but leads to lower average QA accuracy and weaker reasoning and diversity scores. This suggests that, under a limited training budget, source annotations may provide a less targeted signal for improving the desired QG properties. In contrast, our self-supervision data consistently im-proves the overall QG profile while also slightly im-proving average QA performance. Compared with the original SAT, it achieves stronger scores on the majority of dimensions, indicating that the generated supervision is better aligned with producing more visual-centric and reasoning-demanding questions. The mixture of Orig-inal SAT and self-supervision data also improves over Original SAT alone, but remains weaker than using self-supervision data alone. This suggests that naive mixing can dilute the targeted signal produced by our rewriting and filtering process. Overall, these results show that, under a fixed small-data budget, self-supervision data provides a more effective adaptation signal for improv-ing QG quality while preserving QA performance. 

4.4 Do Better Questions Help Supervision? 

To examine whether improved question generation leads to more useful downstream supervision, we compare two training sets that differ only in the source of their generated questions. One uses questions generated by the base Qwen2.5-VL-3B model, while the other uses questions generated by the improved QG model. In both settings, we use GPT-5.4 to generate the corresponding answers, which controls for answer quality and isolates the effect of question quality. As shown in Table 5, training with questions from the improved QG model achieves higher average QA accuracy, improving from 61.90% to 63.32%. The gain is especially clear on CVBench-3D, where accuracy increases from 69.25% to 75.58%, and the improved-question setting also performs better on CVBench-2D, VStar, and RWQA. These results indicate that im-proving QG quality is valuable beyond the question-generation task itself: questions that require richer vi-sual evidence and reasoning provide more informative supervision for downstream QA training, leading to more effective model adaptation. 7Data Source QG Dimension Scores QG Avg. QA Avg. Search Coverage Context Spatial Diversity                             

> Base 0.26 0.39 0.30 0.03 0.28 0.25 60.49 Original SAT 0.45 0.49 0.21 0.22 0.17 0.31 57.46 Original SAT + Self-Supervision 0.44 0.54 0.54 0.32 0.34 0.44 61.28 Self-Supervision 0.43 0.55 0.55 0.37 0.35 0.45 62.26

Table 4: Effect of self-supervision data on training . Self-supervision data refers to the question-answer supervision generated through our rewriting and filtering process. All variants use the same SAT image source and QA+QG training format, but differ in the source of supervision. Original SAT supervision improves visual search difficulty but degrades QA performance and performs worse on reasoning and diversity dimensions. In contrast, our self-supervision data achieves the strongest overall QG profile and the best QA average. QG Avg. is computed as the average over Search, Coverage, Context, Spatial, and Diversity.                   

> Setting CVB-2D CVB-3D Spar VStar RWQA Avg.
> Base-Q 69.16 69.25 30.21 75.92 64.97 61.90 Improved-Q 69.19 75.58 29.78 76.44 65.62 63.32

Table 5: Effect of generated question quality on QA training . Both settings use GPT-generated answers, but differ in whether the training questions are generated by the base model ( Base-Q ) or the improved QG model (Improved-Q ). Improved-Q achieves stronger average QA performance, suggesting that higher-quality gener-ated questions provide more useful supervision. 

## 5 Related Work 

5.1 Visual Question Generation 

Visual Question Generation (VQG) aims to generate natural-language questions grounded in image content. Existing VQG methods are commonly built from ex-ternal supervision, including VQA-style data(Mi et al., 2024; Shen et al., 2024; Vedd et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2024), LLM-generated questions(Suwono et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2025a), and controllable VQG data with predefined constraints such as answers, regions, knowl-edge, or difficulty levels(Fang et al., 2024; Mi et al., 2024; Uehara and Harada, 2023; Shen et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2025a,b). Although these methods improve an-swerability, grounding, diversity, or difficulty control, their question distributions remain tied to fixed datasets, external generators, or predefined control spaces, lim-iting the autonomous development of stronger visual questioning capability. VQG evaluation is also often tied to reference-based metrics such as BLEU, METEOR, CIDEr to compare similarity to given ground-truth questions(Mi et al., 2024; Vedd et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2025a,b). Re-cent work uses LLMs or MLLMs as judges for multi-modal outputs or generated questions(Chen et al., 2024; Noorbakhsh et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2025), but mainly evaluates general multimodal response quality or text-domain question quality rather than fine-grained image-grounded questioning capability. 

5.2 Post-Training for VLMs 

Post-training improves language and vision-language models with instruction data collected from humans, curated datasets, or stronger models(Liu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2026). However, con-structing high-quality supervision is costly and difficult to scale. Recent self-improvement methods reduce this dependence by letting models generate, filter, critique, or judge their own training signals(Yuan et al., 2024; Shen et al., 2025; Deng et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2025). However, these works mainly use self-generated super-vision to improve answering-oriented capabilities, such as visual instruction following, reasoning, and QA per-formance(Wang et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2025; Pan et al., 2026). Unlike these works, where generated questions mainly serve as intermediate super-vision or interaction signals, our work makes the visual questioner itself the object of post-training while pre-serving answering ability. 

## 6 Conclusion 

We present a self-evolving visual questioner framework that improves a VLM’s QG capability without human an-notations or external teacher models. Through question proposal, rewriting, filtering, and dual-format QA/QG training, our method constructs visual-centric, diverse, and reasoning-oriented supervision from unlabeled im-ages. We further introduce an evaluation protocol cover-ing perception, reasoning, and diversity. Experiments show substantial QG improvements while largely pre-serving QA performance, and ablations validate the im-portance of each component and the downstream value of improved questions. 

## 7 Limitations 

Despite the effectiveness of our self-evolving frame-work, it still has several limitations that could be ad-dressed in future work. First, our filtering process cur-rently focuses on answerability and perception/reason-ing difficulty, while more fine-grained criteria could further capture visual grounding, ambiguity, and instruc-tional value. Second, the proposal-rewriting-filtering-training loop introduces additional computation com-8pared with directly training on existing QA data, espe-cially when applied iteratively. This overhead could be reduced through batching, lightweight filtering, or more selective evolution strategies. Nevertheless, the observed improvements in question quality suggest that self-evolving visual questioners are a promising direc-tion for building stronger and more scalable questioning-oriented VLMs. 

## References 

Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, and 1 others. 2025a. Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 .Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wen-bin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shi-jie Wang, Jun Tang, Humen Zhong, Yuanzhi Zhu, Mingkun Yang, Zhaohai Li, Jianqiang Wan, Pengfei Wang, Wei Ding, Zheren Fu, Yiheng Xu, and 8 oth-ers. 2025b. Qwen2.5-vl technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2502.13923. Dongping Chen, Ruoxi Chen, Shilin Zhang, Yaochen Wang, Yinuo Liu, Huichi Zhou, Qihui Zhang, Yao Wan, Pan Zhou, and Lichao Sun. 2024. Mllm-as-a-judge: Assessing multimodal llm-as-a-judge with vision-language benchmark. In Forty-first Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning .Kanzhi Cheng, Li YanTao, Fangzhi Xu, Jianbing Zhang, Hao Zhou, and Yang Liu. 2025. Vision-language models can self-improve reasoning via reflection. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8876–8892. Yihe Deng, Pan Lu, Fan Yin, Ziniu Hu, Sheng Shen, Quanquan Gu, James Zou, Kai-Wei Chang, and Wei Wang. 2024. Enhancing large vision language mod-els with self-training on image comprehension. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:131369–131397. Wenhao Fang, Jiayuan Xie, Hongfei Liu, Jiali Chen, and Yi Cai. 2024. Diverse visual question generation based on multiple objects selection. ACM Transac-tions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications , 20(6):1–22. Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. 2023. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:34892– 34916. Li Mi, Syrielle Montariol, Javiera Castillo Navarro, Xi-anjie Dai, Antoine Bosselut, and Devis Tuia. 2024. Convqg: Contrastive visual question generation with multimodal guidance. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pages 4207–4215. Kimia Noorbakhsh, Joseph Chandler, Pantea Karimi, Mohammad Alizadeh, and Hari Balakrishnan. 2025. Savaal: Scalable concept-driven question genera-tion to enhance human learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12477 .Zhiyu Pan, Yizheng Wu, Jiashen Hua, Junyi Feng, Shaotian Yan, Bing Deng, Zhiguo Cao, and Jieping Ye. 2026. Through the lens of contrast: Self-improving visual reasoning in vlms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.02556 .Kai Shen, Lingfei Wu, Siliang Tang, Fangli Xu, Bo Long, Yueting Zhuang, and Jian Pei. 2024. Ask questions with double hints: Visual question gener-ation with answer-awareness and region-reference. 

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 46(12):9648–9660. Zhanming Shen, Hao Chen, Yulei Tang, Shaolin Zhu, Wentao Ye, Xiaomeng Hu, Haobo Wang, Gang Chen, and Junbo Zhao. 2025. Cycle-instruct: Fully seed-free instruction tuning via dual self-training and cycle consistency. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pages 5123–5137. Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan McLaughlin, Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, Akshay Nathan, Alan Luo, Alec Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Aleksandr Efremov, Aleksandra Spyra, Alex Baker-Whitcomb, Alex Beutel, Alex Karpenko, and 467 others. 2026. Openai gpt-5 system card. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.03267. Nicholas Suwono, Justin Chen, Tun Hung, Ting-Hao Huang, I-Bin Liao, Yung-Hui Li, Lun-Wei Ku, and Shao-Hua Sun. 2023. Location-aware visual question generation with lightweight models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1415–1432. Shengbang Tong, Ellis Brown, Penghao Wu, Sanghyun Woo, Manoj Middepogu, Sai C Akula, Jihan Yang, Shusheng Yang, Adithya Iyer, Xichen Pan, and 1 oth-ers. 2024. Cambrian-1: A fully open, vision-centric exploration of multimodal llms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:87310–87356. Kohei Uehara and Tatsuya Harada. 2023. K-vqg: Knowledge-aware visual question generation for common-sense acquisition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 4401–4409. Nihir Vedd, Zixu Wang, Marek Rei, Yishu Miao, and Lucia Specia. 2022. Guiding visual question gen-eration. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies , pages 1640–1654. Bin Wang, Fan Wu, Xiao Han, Jiahui Peng, Huaping Zhong, Pan Zhang, Xiaoyi Dong, Weijia Li, Wei Li, Jiaqi Wang, and 1 others. 2024. Vigc: Visual instruc-tion generation and correction. In Proceedings of 

9the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol-ume 38, pages 5309–5317. Penghao Wu and Saining Xie. 2024. V?: Guided visual search as a core mechanism in multimodal llms. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 13084– 13094. xAI. 2024. Realworldqa dataset. https: //huggingface.co/datasets/xai-org/ RealworldQA . Accessed: YYYY-MM-DD. Jiayuan Xie, Mengqiu Cheng, Xinting Zhang, Yi Cai, Guimin Hu, Mengying Xie, and Qing Li. 2025a. Ex-plicitly guided difficulty-controllable visual question generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pages 25552– 25560. Jiayuan Xie, Jiasheng Zheng, Wenhao Fang, Yi Cai, and Qing Li. 2025b. Explicitly diverse visual question generation. Neural Networks , 184:107002. Zonghai Yao, Aditya Parashar, Huixue Zhou, Won Seok Jang, Feiyun Ouyang, Zhichao Yang, and Hong Yu. 2025. Mcqg-srefine: Multiple choice question gener-ation and evaluation with iterative self-critique, cor-rection, and comparison feedback. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Amer-icas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 10728–10777. Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Xian Li, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu, and Ja-son Weston. 2024. Self-rewarding language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10020 .Jiahui Zhang, Yurui Chen, Yueming Xu, Ze Huang, Jilin Mei, Chunhui Chen, Yanpeng Zhou, Yu-Jie Yuan, Xinyue Cai, Guowei Huang, and 1 others. 2026. From flatland to space: Teaching vision-language models to perceive and reason in 3d. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38. Xinyu Zhang, Lingling Zhang, Yanrui Wu, Muye Huang, Wenjun Wu, Bo Li, Shaowei Wang, Ba-sura Fernando, and Jun Liu. 2025a. Diagram-driven course questions generation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 5995–6010. Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, and 1 others. 2025b. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176 .Henry Hengyuan Zhao, Pan Zhou, Difei Gao, Zechen Bai, and Mike Zheng Shou. 2024. Lova3: Learning to visual question answering, asking and assessment. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:115146–115175. Zhihan Zhou, Feng Hong, Jiaan Luo, Yushi Ye, Jiangchao Yao, Dongsheng Li, Bo Han, Ya Zhang, and Yanfeng Wang. 2026. Learning to instruct for visual instruction tuning. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 38:47382–47409. 10 A Detailed Explanation of Questioning Capability Evaluation 

Our evaluation protocol measures whether generated questions are visually grounded, challenging, and non-redundant. As summarized in Table 6, we evaluate generated questions at two levels. At the individual-question level, we measure four dimensions grouped into perception difficulty and reasoning difficulty . Per-ception difficulty captures what visual evidence must be found, while reasoning difficulty captures how that evi-dence must be interpreted. At the question-set level, we measure questioning diversity , which captures whether questions generated for the same image provide com-plementary rather than redundant supervision. 

A.1 Perception Difficulty 

Perception difficulty evaluates what visual evidence must be observed to answer a question. It captures the demand placed on visual inspection before reasoning: whether the answer depends on salient evidence, subtle details, localized regions, or broader image content. We decompose perception difficulty into two dimensions: 

Visual Search Difficulty and Visual Evidence Coverage .

Visual Search Difficulty. Visual Search Difficulty 

measures how difficult it is to locate and inspect the evidence needed to answer a question. Questions that depend on salient objects, obvious colors, or clearly visible main subjects receive lower scores. Questions receive higher scores when answering them requires careful inspection of subtle evidence, small or partially occluded objects, peripheral regions, fine-grained de-tails, relative size or area, or counting. 

Visual Evidence Coverage. Visual Evidence Cover-age measures how broadly a question depends on evi-dence across the image. Questions centered on a sin-gle dominant object or a single simple attribute receive lower scores. Questions receive higher scores when they require evidence from multiple objects, regions, attributes, scene cues, or the overall arrangement of the image. This dimension is independent of search diffi-culty: a question may rely on broad image evidence even if each individual cue is easy to locate. 

A.2 Reasoning Difficulty 

Reasoning difficulty evaluates how the observed visual evidence must be used to answer a question. While perception difficulty focuses on finding and inspecting evidence, reasoning difficulty focuses on the inference required after the relevant evidence has been identified. We decompose reasoning difficulty into two dimensions: 

Visual Context Reasoning and Visual Spatial Reasoning .

Visual Context Reasoning. Visual Context Reason-ing measures whether a question requires interpreting what visible cues imply beyond direct recognition or description. Questions that can be answered by simply naming objects, reading visible attributes, or describing directly observable content receive lower scores. Ques-tions receive higher scores when they require inferring the scene context, object state, activity, function, inten-tion, cause, or likely situation suggested by the visual evidence. 

Visual Spatial Reasoning. Visual Spatial Reasoning 

measures whether a question requires reasoning about spatial relationships among visible elements. Questions that do not depend on spatial structure receive lower scores. Questions receive higher scores when they re-quire comparing positions, orientations, distances, con-tainment, occlusion, accessibility, layout, object interac-tions, or multi-hop spatial relations within the scene. 

A.3 Questioning Diversity 

Questioning Diversity is measured at the question-set level because diversity cannot be determined from a sin-gle question in isolation. For each image x, we consider the generated question set Qx = {q1, . . . , q m}. We sample n questions from Qx and repeat this sampling over multiple runs. Each sampled question is encoded by a sentence embedding model and ℓ2-normalized: 

zi = f (qi)

∥f (qi)∥2

. (12) We then compute the average pairwise cosine similarity within the sampled set: 

semb (Qx) = 2

n(n − 1) 

X

> 1≤i<j ≤n

z⊤ 

> i

zj . (13) The diversity score is defined as the corresponding aver-age pairwise cosine distance: 

ddiv (Qx) = 1 − semb (Qx). (14) Higher values indicate that the questions generated for the same image are semantically less redundant and cover more distinct aspects of the image. Lower val-ues indicate repeated templates, near-paraphrases, or duplicated answer targets. This set-level metric comple-ments the individual-question rubric scores by measur-ing whether the generated supervision is diverse across questions, rather than only strong for each question in-dependently. 

## B Detailed Prompts 

In this section, we provide the detailed prompts used for our data generation process and evaluation process. Table 7 summarizes the prompts used in our framework. The full prompt texts are shown in Fig. 2–Fig. 7. 

## C Implementation Details 

Training setup. All models are trained with stan-dard supervised fine-tuning from their corresponding instruction-tuned checkpoints. We conduct experi-ments with Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct, Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct, and Qwen3VL-4B-Instruct. Unless otherwise 11 Level Dimension What it measures 

Question Visual Search Difficulty How difficult it is to locate the visual evidence needed to answer the question. Question Visual Evidence Coverage How broadly the question depends on evidence across objects, regions, attributes, or scene cues. Question Visual Context Reasoning Whether the question requires contextual interpretation of visible cues beyond direct recognition. Question Visual Spatial Reasoning Whether the question requires reasoning over spatial relations, layout, orienta-tion, or scene structure. Set Questioning Diversity How non-redundant the questions generated for the same image are. 

Table 6: Summary of our visual questioning capability evaluation dimensions. 

Question Proposal 

List n1 topics that you can answer questions about . Choose a topic uniformly from this list , and state it . Then write 60 subtopics about the chosen topic . Then choose a subtopic uniformly from this list , and state it . Then write a question that is not about the subtopic , but can only be answered with expertise in the subtopic . Then write the answer . Both the question and answer should be long . The name of the subtopic should not appear in the question , and none of the words in the subtopic should be reused in the question . The question must rely on visual information such that its answer would change or be impossible to determine without the image . The answer should be deterministic and answerable with a few sentences . You should generate only ONE focused question , not multiple sub - questions . IMPORTANT : Do NOT create compound or multi - part questions by joining sub - questions with ’and ’ or ’what ’. A question like ’ How does X affect Y , and what in the image shows Z?’ is FORBIDDEN . It is two easy questions concatenated , not aharder one . Instead , make the SINGLE question harder by requiring deeper reasoning : multi - hop inference , counterfactual / causal reasoning , cross -region comparison , or quantitative / ordinal judgment . The answer must be DIFFERENT from the original answer . Return the result in JSON format : {’ Question ’: ’xxx ’, ’ Thinkings ’: ’ Your selection process ’}. 

Figure 2: Question proposal prompt used to produce the initial question-answer pair. 

Stage Reference 

Question Proposal Fig. 2 Rewriting with visual facts Fig. 3 Rewriting with hard examples Fig. 4 Filtering Fig. 5 & 6 Agentic QG evaluation Fig. 7 

Table 7: Overview of prompts used in the self-evolving visual questioner framework and the agentic visual ques-tioning capability evaluation. specified, each model is trained on 10 ,000 retained question-answer pairs produced by our self-evolution pipeline. We use a training batch size of 2 and AdamW as the optimizer. The learning rate is set to 2 × 10 −5

with a cosine scheduler and a warm-up ratio of 0.1. All models are trained for one epoch. 

Computing infrastructure and budget. Training and evaluation for Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct and Qwen3-VL-4B-Instruct are conducted on NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPUs, while Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct is trained and evaluated on NVIDIA A100 GPUs. Most training, gen-eration, and evaluation runs use a single GPU per run. For data generation, producing one training-ready set of 

10 ,000 self-supervision question-answer pairs requires approximately 24 GPU hours with 16-way parallel gen-eration. For supervised fine-tuning, training one model on 10 ,000 retained examples for one epoch takes ap-proximately 1 − 3 GPU hours, depending on the model size. For evaluation, running the full benchmark suite for one checkpoint takes approximately 4−7 GPU hours, depending on the model size. Across the main experi-ments, ablations, and evaluation runs, the total computa-tional budget is estimated from these per-run costs and includes both successful runs and exploratory runs used to tune training settings. All experiments are run on a Linux GPU cluster with standard CUDA/PyTorch-based training infrastructure. 

Evaluation setup. For question-generation evaluation, all compared models use the same held-out image set, generation prompt, and decoding configuration. We use GPT-5.4 as the judge model for individual-question 12 evaluation, including visual search difficulty, visual ev-idence coverage, visual context reasoning, and visual spatial reasoning. For set-level diversity evaluation, we use Qwen/Qwen3-Embedding-4B as the embedding model and compute semantic distances among questions generated for the same image. For QG evaluation, we compute scores by averaging evaluation results across generated questions or images, depending on the eval-uation dimension. For downstream QA evaluation, we follow the standard protocol of each benchmark, keep inference settings fixed across all compared checkpoints, and report accuracy averaged over three runs. 

Software and evaluation implementations. For model training and question generation, we use the of-ficial Qwen2.5-VL and Qwen3-VL implementations through the standard PyTorch and Hugging Face Trans-formers package. For QG evaluation, we use GPT-5.4 as the judge model with fixed prompts, rubrics, and decoding settings across all compared methods. For di-versity evaluation, we use Qwen/Qwen3-Embedding-4B 

as the embedding model and compute semantic dis-tances among questions generated for the same image. For downstream QA evaluation, we use VLMEvalKit to evaluate benchmark performance and follow the stan-dard evaluation protocols and answer-matching rules of each benchmark. We do not modify the underly-ing model architectures or external library implementa-tions. 

## D Detailed QA Benchmark Results 

Table 8 provides the full QA benchmark results cor-responding to the main experiments and the data-source ablation. The evaluation includes CVBench-2D with 1,438 samples, CVBench-3D with 1,200 samples, SPARBench with 7,207 samples, VStar with 191 sam-ples, and RealWorldQA with 765 samples. These results support the conclusion that our filtered self-generated data improves question-generation quality without caus-ing broad degradation in downstream answering ability. 

## E Human and QG Evaluation Alignment 

E.1 Human Annotation Protocol 

To validate the reliability of our GPT-based question-generation evaluation, we conduct a human-GPT align-ment study on a randomly sampled set of 100 gener-ated visual questions. The annotators were recruited internally from student researchers familiar with vision-language tasks. Participation was voluntary and un-paid, and no private or sensitive information was col-lected from the annotators. The annotation task only involves scoring generated questions according to the same rubrics used by our automatic evaluator. Annotators are shown the image, the generated ques-tion, and the scoring instructions for each dimension. They are asked to independently score four QG dimen-sions: visual search difficulty, visual evidence coverage, visual context reasoning, and visual spatial reasoning. The full annotation interface and instruction screenshots are shown in Figure 8. The task does not ask annotators to provide personal information, identify individuals in the images, infer protected attributes, or make decisions about people. Annotators are instructed to focus only on whether the question is grounded in the image and how much vi-sual perception or reasoning is required to answer it. Participation is voluntary, and no private or sensitive in-formation is collected from the annotators. The sampled questions are generated from existing public research datasets and are screened to avoid clearly offensive or unsafe content before annotation. The collected anno-tations are used only to measure agreement with GPT-based evaluation and are reported only in aggregate form through correlation statistics. 

E.2 Human Alignment Results 

Table 9 reports the alignment between averaged human scores and GPT-based evaluation scores. Overall, GPT-based evaluation shows positive correlation with human judgments across all four dimensions, suggesting that it captures meaningful trends in human-perceived ques-tion quality. The strongest alignment is observed for visual context reasoning, with a Spearman correlation of 0.662, indicating that GPT evaluation is relatively con-sistent with humans when judging whether a question requires higher-level visual interpretation. Visual search difficulty and visual spatial reasoning also show moder-ate positive correlations. Visual evidence coverage has the lowest correlation, which is expected because this dimension requires more fine-grained judgment about how broadly a question uses relevant objects, regions, or visual evidence in the image. These results suggest that our GPT-based evaluator is a reasonable proxy for scalable QG evaluation. Al-though it cannot fully replace human judgment, the positive correlations across all dimensions support its use for comparing model-generated questions at scale. 

## F Comparison with LOVA3 

To further contextualize the quality of questions produced by our framework, we compare against LOVA3(Zhao et al., 2024), a recent multimodal training paradigm that augments instruction tuning with question asking and VQA-triplet assessment capabilities. We use LOVA3-LLaVA-v1.5-7B and compare it with our results based on the Qwen2.5-VL-3B backbone. LOVA3 relies on existing instruction-tuning data, where supervision is provided by human annotations or stronger external models such as GPT. In contrast, our framework con-structs self-generated and self-refined supervision from unlabeled images without human annotations or external teacher models. Since our focus is visual question generation qual-ity, we compare generated questions using the same questioning capability evaluation protocol described in Section 2.3. This comparison focuses on perception, 13 Backbone Training stage / Data source CVB-2D CVB-3D Spar VStar RWQA Avg.                                                                                                             

> Qwen2.5-VL-3B Base 66.75 65.50 28.89 74.39 66.92 60.49 First-round 69.35 71.50 30.50 74.87 65.10 62.26 Second-round 69.31 72.17 31.24 75.39 64.70 62.56 QA-only 69.28 71.67 30.96 74.87 65.23 62.40 QA+QG 69.34 71.50 30.50 74.87 65.10 62.26 Original SAT 64.87 61.75 31.06 68.59 61.05 57.46 Original SAT + Self-Evolving 68.74 69.67 30.92 73.30 63.79 61.28 Self-Evolving 69.34 71.50 30.50 74.87 65.10 62.26 Qwen2.5-VL-7B Base 75.67 74.83 33.81 76.44 68.76 65.90 First-round 75.98 78.08 33.50 77.49 70.07 67.02 Second-round 76.29 78.42 33.55 76.96 69.28 66.90 QA-only 75.19 77.67 33.61 77.49 68.89 66.57 QA+QG 75.98 78.08 33.47 77.49 70.07 67.02 Qwen3VL-4B Base 78.83 91.92 36.16 78.53 71.11 71.31 First-round 78.06 91.08 36.29 79.06 71.11 71.12 Second-round 78.39 91.50 36.16 78.53 70.98 71.11 QA-only 77.39 90.83 35.71 77.49 70.46 70.38 QA+QG 78.06 91.08 36.29 79.06 71.11 71.12

Table 8: Detailed QA benchmark results used in the main experiments, supervision-format ablation, and data-source ablation. We report accuracy on CVBench-2D, CVBench-3D, SparBench, VStar, and RealWorldQA, together with the average accuracy across these five benchmarks. The First-round rows correspond to the default self-evolving QA+QG setting used in the main results. The QA-only and QA+QG rows compare supervision formats under matched settings, while the original SAT, original SAT + self-evolving, and self-evolving rows compare different sources of question-answer supervision in the Qwen2.5-VL-3B setting. 

QG Dimension Spearman 

Visual Search Difficulty 0.454 Visual Evidence Coverage 0.358 Visual Context Reasoning 0.662 Visual Spatial Reasoning 0.423 

Table 9: Human–GPT evaluation alignment across QG dimensions. Spearman correlation is computed between averaged human annotation scores and GPT-based eval-uation scores. reasoning, and diversity dimensions. As shown in Table 10, our first-round model already improves over LOVA3 on visual search difficulty, vi-sual evidence coverage, visual context reasoning, and visual spatial reasoning. The largest gains appear on the reasoning dimensions, especially visual context rea-soning, where the score increases from 0.259 to 0.553. This suggests that our framework produces questions that require more contextual interpretation and spatial reasoning over image evidence. The second-round model further improves the QG profile and achieves the highest average QG score. Com-pared with LOVA3, the average QG score increases from 0.325 to 0.501. These results indicate that our self-evolving framework can generate questions that are more visual-centric and reasoning-demanding under the same evaluation protocol. 

## G Qualitative Analysis 

We provide qualitative examples in Fig 9 and 10 com-paring questions generated by the base model M0, the first-round model M1, and the second-round model M2

on the same images. These examples illustrate how our method gradually improves the model’s QG capability. The base model typically produces simple recognition or attribute-based questions that are valid but require limited visual inspection or reasoning. After adaptation, the model generates questions that are more grounded in specific visual evidence and involve richer reason-ing signals, including cross-region reflection reasoning, relative-size comparison, depth/layout understanding, and fine-grained counting with exclusion. The second-round model further improves question specificity and relation-centered reasoning, consistent with the quantita-tive gains observed in visual search difficulty, evidence coverage, visual context reasoning, spatial reasoning, and diversity. 14 Model Search Coverage Context Spatial Diversity QG Avg. 

LOVA3 0.368 0.436 0.259 0.200 0.360 0.325 Ours, First-round 0.433 0.547 0.553 0.367 0.350 0.450 Ours, Second-round 0.487 0.607 0.640 0.400 0.370 0.501 

Table 10: Comparison with LOVA3 under our visual questioning capability evaluation protocol. We report dimension-level QG scores and the average across all five dimensions. 

Rewriting Prompt for Broader Questions 

You are a Question generator . Your objective is to rewrite a given Q&A into agenuinely harder version that requires more visual evidence or reasoning steps . Make it harder by increasing the DEPTH of reasoning required . Examples include evidence selection , object - role comparison , spatial relation reasoning , scene - function inference , and multi - object grounding . Do NOT make it harder by simply appending more sub - questions or extra clauses . Do NOT generate a question that asks the same thing as the original or is just a paraphrase . Do NOT start your rewritten question with the same first 5 words as the seed question . The question should not become broader , more subjective , or more generic . The added constraint must change the type or depth of reasoning required , not just expand the question ’s length . Use the extracted visual facts below as grounding evidence . Only use facts that are clearly supported by the image . Extracted visual facts : { rag_facts } Question : { seed_question } Answer : { seed_answer } Constraints : - Require at least 2 concrete visible objects , regions , or relations . - The question must contain a hidden intermediate inference . - The intermediate inference step must not be given away in the question . - Do NOT ask for subjective preference or broad commonsense . - Do NOT merely paraphrase the seed question with synonyms . - Ensure all generated data is consistent with the image content . - The question must rely on visual information such that its answer would change or be impossible to determine without the image . - Generate only ONE focused question , not multiple sub - questions . - Make the SINGLE question harder by requiring deeper reasoning : multi - hop inference , counterfactual / causal reasoning , cross - region comparison , or quantitative / ordinal judgment . - ’ reasoning_steps ’ MUST contain at least 2 non - trivial , concrete operations , not just ’ step 1’ or ’ step 2 ’. Return the result in JSON format : {’ Rewritten question ’: ’ one single syntactic question ending with ?’, ’visible_evidence ’: [’ at least two concrete visible objects / regions / relations required to answer , using the EXACT object names that appear in your question ’] , ’ intermediate_inference ’: ’ the hidden bridging inference required before the final answer ’, ’ reasoning_steps ’: [’< concrete step , e. g. Locate the red chair >’, ’< concrete step , e.g. Compare its distance to the desk lamp vs the blue chair > ’] , ’ why_harder_than_seed ’: ’ why this requires more grounded reasoning than the seed ’ ,} 

Figure 3: Rewriting prompt that rewrites a question proposal using extracted visual facts as grounding evidence. 15 Rewriting Prompt for Harder Questions 

You are a Question generator . Your objective is to rewrite a given Q&A into agenuinely harder version that requires more visual evidence or reasoning steps . Make it harder by increasing the DEPTH of reasoning required . Examples include evidence selection , object - role comparison , spatial relation reasoning , scene - function inference , and multi - object grounding . Do NOT make it harder by simply appending more sub - questions or extra clauses . Do NOT generate a question that asks the same thing as the original or is just a paraphrase . Do NOT start your rewritten question with the same first 5 words as the seed question . The question should not become broader , more subjective , or more generic . The added constraint must change the type or depth of reasoning required , not just expand the question ’s length . The following questions were generated for similar images and are rated as HARD : { examples_text } Rewrite the following Q&A so it is harder than the examples while staying tightly grounded in this image . It must require more reasoning steps , finer perceptual discrimination , or a deeper multi - hop chain . Question : { seed_question } Answer : { seed_answer } Examples of GOOD rewritten questions : Example 1: Q: ’ Which chair , the wooden chair or the metal chair , is positioned closer to the desk lamp ?’ visible_evidence : [’ wooden chair ’, ’ metal chair ’, ’ desk lamp ’] reasoning_steps : [’ Locate the wooden chair and measure its distance to the desk lamp ’, ’ Locate the metal chair and measure its distance to the desk lamp ’, ’ Compare the two distances ’] Constraints : - Do not reuse the same reasoning pattern as any example above . - The added difficulty must come from deeper reasoning , not longer question text . - Require at least 2 concrete visible objects , regions , or relations . - The question must contain a hidden intermediate inference . - Do NOT merely paraphrase the seed question with synonyms . - Ensure all generated data is consistent with the image content . - The question must rely on visual information such that its answer would change or be impossible to determine without the image . - Generate only ONE focused question , not multiple sub - questions . - ’ reasoning_steps ’ MUST contain at least 2 non - trivial , concrete operations , not just ’ step 1’ or ’ step 2 ’. Return the result in JSON format : {’ Rewritten question ’: ’ one single syntactic question ending with ?’, ’visible_evidence ’: [’ at least two concrete visible objects / regions / relations required to answer , using the EXACT object names that appear in your question ’] , ’ intermediate_inference ’: ’ the hidden bridging inference required before the final answer ’, ’ reasoning_steps ’: [’< concrete step , e. g. Locate the red chair >’, ’< concrete step , e.g. Compare its distance to the desk lamp vs the blue chair > ’] , ’ why_harder_than_seed ’: ’ why this requires more grounded reasoning than the seed ’, ’ final_answer_type ’: ’short phrase | entity | comparison | count | yes_no ’, }

Figure 4: Rewriting prompt that rewrites a question proposal using retrieved hard examples as references. 16 Filtering Prompt (Part 1) 

You are a strict filtering judge for visual question generation . Your task is to evaluate whether a generated question - answer pair should be kept for training . You must judge the question using the provided image , the seed question - answer pair , and the generated question - answer pair . You must perform four checks : 1. Entity extraction : extract all noun or noun - phrase entities mentioned in the generated question . 2. Visual entity difficulty : categorize each shared visual entity as EASY or HARD based on the image . 3. Reasoning difficulty : infer the cognitive reasoning steps required to answer the generated question . 4. filter decision : decide whether the generated question is better than the seed question and should be kept . Definitions : - EASY visual entity : prominent , unobstructed , and immediately identifiable in the image . - HARD visual entity : tiny , occluded , blurry , low - contrast , visually similar to nearby objects , peripheral , or requires careful inspection . - Reasoning step : one cognitive operation required to answer the question , such as identifying objects , comparing quantities , interpreting spatial relations , inferring function , integrating multiple cues , or reasoning about cause / effect . - Do not count meta steps such as " look at the image " or " analyze the question ". - Do not include verification or double - checking steps . - Do not include the final answer as a reasoning step . Keep the generated question only if ALL conditions below are satisfied : - It is answerable from the image . - Its answer is consistent with the image . - It is not a trivial rephrasing of the seed question . - It is visually grounded and depends on image evidence . - It is at least as difficult as the seed question in one or more of the following dimensions : visual perception difficulty , text perception difficulty , or reasoning difficulty . - It does not become vague , subjective , overly broad , or multi - question . - It asks one focused question , not several questions joined together . - Its answer is deterministic and concise . 

Figure 5: (Part 1) Filtering prompt used to determine whether a rewritten question should be retained in the self-evolving visual questioner framework.. 17 Filtering Prompt (Part 2) 

Inputs : Image : [ VISUAL_INPUT ] Seed question : { seed_question } Seed answer : { seed_answer } Generated question : { generated_question } Generated answer : { generated_answer } Output a SINGLE minified JSON object only . Do not output markdown , explanations , comments , or extra text . The JSON must start with { and end with }. Required JSON schema : {" entity_extraction ": {" generated_question_entities ": [" entity1 ", " entity2 "] }, " visual_entity_difficulty ": {" easy_count ": 0, " hard_count ": 0, " categorized_entities ": [{" entity ": " name ", " difficulty ": " easy | hard ", " reason ": " short reason " }]}, " reasoning_difficulty ": {" count ": 0, " evidence ": [" step1 ", " step2 " ]}}Important rules : - Analyze every extracted entity that is visible or potentially grounded in the image . - The sum of easy_count and hard_count must equal the number of unique visual entities analyzed . - If the generated question cannot be answered from the image , set decision to " discard ". - If the generated answer contradicts the image , set decision to " discard ". - If the question contains multiple sub - questions , set single_focused_question to false and decision to " discard ". - If none of improves_visual_perception , improves_text_perception , or improves_reasoning is true , set decision to " discard ". 

Figure 6: (Part 2) Filtering prompt used to determine whether a rewritten question should be retained in the self-evolving visual questioner framework.. 18 Question Quality Evaluation Prompt 

Use only the image and the current question . Ignore model identity and do not compare with other questions . Score what the question requires to answer , not how long or fluent it is . Give credit to visually grounded conceptual or functional questions when the image contains concrete evidence ; penalize generic world - knowledge answers , unsupported assumptions , and unanswerable questions . Record : { record_json } Score independently from 0 to 5: - visual_search_difficulty : visual search / inspection effort . 0= no image needed ; 1= obvious evidence ; 3= specific region or nearby items ; 5= multi - region search , counting , distance / area , or easy -to - miss fine detail . - visual_evidence_coverage : breadth of concrete visual evidence . 0= no visible evidence ; 1= one dominant object / scene ; 3= two objects or one local region ; 5= broad scene evidence , multiple important regions , or overall arrangement .- visual_context_reasoning : conceptual interpretation beyond direct observation . 0= non - visual / unsupported ; 1= direct identifying , reading , counting , locating , or comparing ; 2= simple visible state / action / category judgment ; 3= single - step interpretation from one cue ; 4= multi - cue scene / situation interpretation ; 5= non - obvious explanation or implication requiring weighed visual cues . - visual_spatial_reasoning : use of layout / position / object relations . 0= none ; 1= absolute location ; 2= one simple relation ; 3= one spatial comparison ; 4= multiple linked relations ; 5= complex spatial inference such as path , occlusion , containment , stability , or scene structure . Return JSON only : {" visual_search_difficulty ": int , " visual_evidence_coverage ": int , " visual_context_reasoning ": int , " visual_spatial_reasoning ": int }

Figure 7: Question quality evaluation prompt used to score generated questions along visual search, evidence coverage, contextual reasoning, and spatial reasoning dimensions. 19 Figure 8: Screenshots of the human annotation interface and scoring instructions used in the human–GPT alignment study. Annotators are shown the image, generated question, and rubrics for scoring visual search difficulty, visual evidence coverage, visual context reasoning, and visual spatial reasoning. Zoom-in for more details. Base model M0 First-round model M1 Second-round model M2 Reasoning signal 

> What is the color of the fireplace in the picture?
> What is placed on top of the fireplace?
> Cross-region reflection reasoning
> Is the object placed on top of the fireplace sown in the mirror?
> What is the color and design of the water tower?
> What color is the water tower with “Balsam Lake” written on it?
> Relative-size comparison across regions
> Which flag is larger, the American flag on the water tower or the red flag near the trees?
> What is the color and condition of the grass?
> What is the purpose of the white building in the background in this image?
> Depth and layout reasoning
> Which building is closer, the grandstand on the right or the small white building on the left?
> What type of table is depicted in the image?
> What is the purpose of the red cushion on the chairs?
> Fine-grained counting with exclusion
> How many items are placed on top of the table except the flowerpot?

Figure 9: Qualitative examples of question improvement across generation rounds. We compare questions generated by the base model M0, the first-round model M1, and the second-round model M2 on the same images. The base model often asks shallow recognition questions about colors, object types, or scene categories. After iterative generation and training, the generated questions become more visually grounded and require stronger reasoning signals, such as cross-region reflection reasoning, relative-size comparison, depth/layout understanding, and fine-grained counting with exclusion. 20 Base model M0 First-round model M1 Second-round model M2 Reasoning signal 

What is the color scheme of the bedroom? 

What items have the color of yellow on the bed in this bedroom? 

Scene mood reasoning 

How does the color scheme of the bedroom affect its mood and atmosphere? 

What is the shape of the rocks at the bottom in this image? 

What is the shape of the rock formation in the image? Spatial/layout reasoning 

How does the shape and relative position of the stones affect its stability in the picture? 

What is the color and design of the tricycle in the image? 

What’s the purpose of the colorful alphabet letters on the floor? 

activity reasoning 

Which chair is more suitable for child’s drawing activity, the red chair or the yellow chair? 

What is the person wearing? What is the person looking at in the photo? 

Human engagement reasoning 

How does the viewer’s posture and body language reflect their engagement with the art? Figure 10: Qualitative examples of question improvement across generation rounds. We compare questions generated by the base model M0, the first-round model M1, and the second-round model M2 on the same images. The base model tends to ask simple recognition questions about color, shape, object type, or visible attributes. After iterative generation and training, the questions become more visually grounded and reasoning-oriented, requiring scene mood reasoning, spatial/layout reasoning, activity reasoning, and human engagement reasoning. 21