Title: Self-Evolving Agents with Anytime-Valid Certificates

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.00871v1

Published Time: Thu, 02 Jul 2026 01:00:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# Self-Evolving Agents with Anytime-Valid Certificates 

Biswa Sengupta 

LLM Suite Team, JPMorgan Chase & Co. 

biswa.sengupta@jpmorgan.com 

## Abstract 

Self-evolving agents violate the assumption behind most learning-theoretic guar-antees: the data, evaluator, components, and hypothesis space are produced by the policy being updated. We present SEA , an architecture that confines self-modification to a small steering adapter and a versioned harness around a frozen 

base model and admits each modification only through an anytime-valid gate that emits an auditable certificate against a fixed error budget. Five loop controllers compose published guarantees; because such gates can only select among behaviors the frozen base already produces, five verifier-in-the-loop mechanisms—best-of-N ,micro-step search, self-authored reproduction oracles, search-layer control, and self-repair—supply the dense, grader-free signal the gates require, computed from the issue text alone. On a 52 -instance SWE-bench Verified subset across four base models, base capability is the dominant, confound-free effect, and on two strong base models a deliberate no-op-composite control isolates the suite’s contribution at +4 and +5 (G LM 5.2 24 → 28 ; G PT 29 → 34 , the 65% best), with event logs confirming that its mechanisms fire and prevent regressions. Results are single-run on expensive evaluations; confirming run-to-run variance and adapting the per-task algorithm mix are future work. 

Disclaimer: This paper was prepared for informational purposes by the LLM Suite group of JP Morgan Chase and its affiliates (‘JPMC’) and is not a product of the Research Department of JP Morgan. JP Morgan makes no representation, warranty or undertaking whatsoever and disclaims all liability for the completeness, accuracy or reliability of the information contained herein. This document is not intended as investment research or investment advice, or a recommendation, offer or solicitation for the purchase or sale of any security, financial instrument, financial product or service, or to be used in any way for evaluating the merits of participating in any transaction, and shall not constitute a solicitation under any jurisdiction or to any person, if such solicitation under such jurisdiction or to such person would be unlawful. 

## 1 Introduction 

A self-evolving agent improves its own future behavior using data, evaluations, components, and a hypothesis space that it itself produces—rewriting prompts and tools, distilling its outputs, learning its reward models, growing skill libraries. The guarantees one would invoke for such systems, however, were proven for exogenous environments: continual-learning forgetting bounds [Farajtabar et al., 2020, Chugg et al., 2023], convergence of preference optimization [Tiapkin et al., 2025, Wang et al., 2025], unbiasedness of policy-gradient estimators [Meulemans et al., 2023], safe policy improvement [Thomas et al., 2015], and library-learning optimality [Bowers et al., 2023] each assume a task stream, evaluator, MDP, or program library fixed independently of the learner. We call the violation the endogenous-loop failure mode : the evolving policy generates the data it trains on, the evaluator it is judged by, the components it is built from, and the hypothesis space it searches. The name is a shorthand, not a precise mathematical category, and taken literally it overstates the problem: violating a theorem’s hypotheses voids its certificate but does not negate its conclusion. The 

Preprint. Under review. 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved 

> arXiv:2607.00871v1 [cs.AI] 1 Jul 2026

guarantee simply ceases to be certified —the bound may still hold, may degrade gracefully, or may break, depending on the problem—and performative-prediction theory shows the loop can in fact still contract when the policy-induced distribution shift is small enough [Perdomo et al., 2020]. We use the term to mark where classical guarantees stop applying, not to claim that learning provably fails. This paper develops an architecture and a set of concrete algorithms for this setting, together with an executable reference implementation from which all pseudo-code in this paper is distilled. Two principles organize the design. First, every self-modification passes through an anytime-valid gate :each classical seed result is wrapped in exactly the machinery required for its guarantee to survive the closed loop—performative stability [Perdomo et al., 2020], anytime-valid inference [Ramdas et al., 2023, Howard et al., 2021], dynamic-regret online learning [Cutkosky, 2020, Baby and Wang, 2022], and two-timescale stochastic approximation [Borkar, 2008]. Second, gates can only select among behaviors the frozen base model already produces; when a base model’s failure is systematic rather than stochastic, and the reward arrives only at the end of an episode, there is nothing for a gate to select. We therefore make the task verifier an active in-loop control signal (§5)—inside the episode, across attempts, over the action space, and inside credit assignment—so that the controllers have both the signal and the variation they need to act on. 

Contributions. 

1. A four-layer reference architecture (§3) that decomposes a self-evolving LLM agent into a frozen base model L0, a small steering adapter L1 (steered online; not weight-fine-tuned in any reported run), a mutable, versioned harness L2, and a loop controller L3 (Figure 1). Because 

L0 is frozen and L1 is low-dimensional, policy deltas ∥πt − πt−1∥ are measurable and can be trust-regioned, which is what renders the performative-sensitivity machinery applicable at all. 2. Five loop controllers (§4), one per failure mode of the endogenous loop: stability–plasticity, self-referential collapse, credit assignment, verifiable self-modification, and hypothesis-space expansion. Each is given as a precise problem statement, an algorithmic solution with pseudo-code (Algorithms 1–5), and an explicit account of which published results it builds on and which guarantees remain open conjectures in the endogenous setting. 3. Verifier-in-the-loop mechanisms and a two-loop design (§5): a graded verifier (Eq. 9), closed-loop test execution, an explore →edit budget, process-level reward, and a verifier-gated refinement hill-climb (Alg. 6), building to a verified micro-step search (Alg. 7) and a search-then-distill two-loop design [Zelikman et al., 2022, Gulcehre et al., 2023] into which the five controllers are re-aimed (Table 2; four on the search layer, Alg. 9, validated by offline gate simulations). 4. A self-authored in-loop verifier (§5.2, Algorithm 8): the search is steered by a reproduction-oracle suite the model writes from the issue alone, admitted by a single rule (an oracle must fail on the unpatched base ), while the held-out grader is reserved for terminal measurement. Where an oracle suite is admitted the search runs grader-free, and the held-out tests never steer it. 5. Verified self-repair of the harness (§5.4, Algorithm 10): a repertoire of harness-repair primitives that the loop selects by measured fix-rate against the real environment , not by human judgment— the same propose-and-gate discipline as A LG 4, applied to the agent’s own failure modes. 6. A reusable anytime-valid statistical core (§6): normal-mixture confidence sequences, Hoeffd-ing e-processes with predictable plug-in betting, a horizon-free, normalized confirm-triggered harmonic spending schedule, time-uniform PAC-Bayes penalties, parameter-free coin-betting oracles with drift-triggered restarts, exact 1-D Wasserstein computation, wild-bootstrap trend tests, MAP-Elites archives, and Stitch-style MDL compression by antiunification with sound dominance pruning. We are deliberate about epistemic status. Every mathematical statement in this paper is drawn from a published result, cited at the point of use; we do not derive new bounds or rates here. Where a classical guarantee is invoked, we state precisely what its source proves and treat its survival under the endogenous loop as an open conjecture , without positing a proof. Likewise, whether any given mechanism lifts a given base model is not argued from anecdote: the protocol of §8 is designed to answer it, and we defer that discussion to the results. 2

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

L0 — frozen base model 

L1 — steering adapter θ (online-steered; not fine-tuned) 

L2 — harness: prompt · tools · budgets · library        

> deployed policy πt=L0◦L(t)1◦L(t)2

ALG 4 SGM-CS: gated harness edits (CS +  

> εW 1+CTHS)

ALG 5 SDC-QD: grows the abstraction library (MDL + QD) 

ALG 3 PA-COCOA: counterfactual credit → θ

ALG 1 PPB-CL: forgetting gate + trust region on 

> θ

ALG 2 PNMP-A: anchors the learned reward model q 

> L3— loop controllers (composite two-timescale scheduler)
> edit (slow)
> grow (slow)
> train (fast)
> protect (fast)

environment + verifier          

> tasks ·test execution ·rewards R, ˜R∈[0 ,1]

reward model q certificate ledger        

> ACCEPT /HOLD /NSF ·δ-spend
> deploy / act obs. +test feedback
> rollouts ·rewards
> e-value drift gate
> scores rollouts

Figure 1: How the four layers and the five controllers interact. The deployed policy πt = L0 ◦

L(t)1 ◦ L(t)2 composes a frozen base model L0, a small steering adapter L1, and a mutable harness L2;the fourth layer—the L3 loop controllers—sits outside this forward pass. Deployments induce the performative distribution D(πt) and the verifier returns bounded terminal and process rewards; the L3

controllers consume these and act on their own layers through anytime-valid gates—A LG 3/A LG 1update and protect L1 each round (fast timescale), A LG 4/A LG 5 edit and grow L2 every K rounds (slow timescale), and A LG 2 guards any learned reward model with an e-value drift gate. Every decision is logged in the certificate ledger against the error budget δ0. In all reported runs L1 is 

steered —its distribution over discrete directives updated online by A LG 1/A LG 3—never weight-fine-tuned; weight-level adapter training by the slow-loop distillation of §5.3 is designed but not run here. 

## 2 Related Work 

SEA introduces no new learning theory; it reuses guarantees proved for exogenous settings and asks what each needs in order to survive a loop the learner closes on itself. The prior work accordingly plays two roles. A shared lens (performativity) and a shared gate (anytime-valid inference) cut across all five controllers; four classical literatures then each supply the seed result for one controller, and a fifth thread—verifier-guided search—is the engine that feeds the gates rather than a controller in its own right. 

Performativity is the lens. The common difficulty is that an agent’s own updates move the distribution it is then judged on. Performative prediction makes this precise: Perdomo et al. [2020] define decision-dependent distributions D(π) through the sensitivity condition W1(D(π), D(π′)) ≤

ε∥π − π′∥ (their Def. 3.1) and show that for β-smooth, γ-strongly-convex losses repeated retraining contracts to a performatively stable point at a linear rate when ε < γ/β (their Thm. 3.5), a threshold shown tight in their Prop. 3.6. Mandal et al. [2023] carry this into reinforcement learning, where reward and transition kernels are (εr , ε p)-sensitive in the occupancy measure and convergence is 

restored by sufficiently strong regularization (their Thm. 1)—so under performativity, trust regions and regularization are necessary rather than optional. We adopt this lens throughout: the deployed configuration is our performative variable, and ε enters both as a trust-region coefficient (A LG 1) and as a confidence-radius inflation (A LG 4). 

Anytime-valid inference is the gate. Because a self-evolving agent inspects its own statistics every round, any test it relies on must stay valid under continuous peeking—fixed-n inference is invalid by construction. E-values, e-processes, and time-uniform confidence sequences supply exactly this license for optional stopping [Ramdas et al., 2023, Howard et al., 2021, Ville, 1939]. The 3

2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved Statistical Gödel Machine [Wu et al., 2025], a statistical descendant of Schmidhuber’s proof-based Gödel machine [Schmidhuber, 2003], applies the idea to self-modification: it gates each self-edit with an e-value and, because an accepted edit is an irreversible commit, controls familywise (not false-discovery) error under a harmonic spending schedule. A LG 4 builds directly on this gate, adding a performative correction and a non-stationarity test [Chandak et al., 2020] and inheriting the abstention semantics of high-confidence, Seldonian policy improvement [Thomas et al., 2015, 2019]—the source of our “no solution found” output. 

Four endogenous failure modes, four seeds. Each remaining controller takes a guarantee proved in an exogenous world and asks it to hold once the agent supplies its own data. Continual learning. 

Orthogonal gradient descent leaves earlier-task predictions unchanged [Farajtabar et al., 2020], but its no-forgetting guarantee is an NTK-regime result that needs unbounded Jacobian memory [Abbana Bennani et al., 2020, Thm. 2], while the time-uniform PAC-Bayes forgetting certificates of Friedman and Meir [2025, Thm. 3.1] and Chugg et al. [2023, Thm. 3.1] require a data-independent prior; both assumptions break when the agent reuses its own evolving policy on a stream it generates, which ALG 1 confronts with a finite direction buffer inside a performative trust region. Self-consuming loops and preference games. Pure self-training collapses—tails vanish and variance shrinks [Shumailov et al., 2024]—unless real data is retained: accumulating rather than replacing data bounds the error independently of iteration count [Gerstgrasser et al., 2024], and a constant real-data fraction α

caps the cumulative shift at 2M (1 − (1 − α)t)α−1dTV (n) [Fu et al., 2025, Thm. 1]. In parallel, preference optimization converges only in the last iterate and only for a fixed game—magnetic mirror descent reaches the regularized Nash equilibrium and recovers the true one by refreshing its magnet [Wang et al., 2025], and proximal-point self-play contracts geometrically up to a gradient-residual floor [Tiapkin et al., 2025]—while a learned reward model over-optimizes, its proxy–gold gap growing with √KL [Gao et al., 2023]. A LG 2 couples a real-data anchor against collapse with last-iterate self-play, separated onto two timescales [Borkar, 2008]. Credit assignment. Hindsight credit assignment reweights each reward by how much the action could have influenced it, dropping rewards it could not [Harutyunyan et al., 2019]; COCOA generalizes the conditioning from future states to rewarding outcomes and is unbiased under a fully-predictive encoding with ground-truth contribution coefficients (their Def. 2 and Thm. 1)—but only in a fixed MDP [Meulemans et al., 2023]. A LG 3 folds the deploying policy into the outcome encoding and drives the update with parameter-free, strongly-adaptive online learning [Cutkosky, 2020, Orabona and Pál, 2016, Baby and Wang, 2022], whose dynamic-regret rates are stated against a drifting comparator. Library learning. DreamCoder grows a program library by wake-sleep MDL learning [Ellis et al., 2021] and Stitch makes the abstraction step exact via corpus-guided top-down synthesis with sound dominance pruning [Bowers et al., 2023], but neither has a convergence or no-collapse guarantee when the corpus is generated under the very library being learned; A LG 5 therefore keeps a MAP-Elites archive over behaviors [Mouret and Clune, 2015, Cully and Demiris, 2018] rather than a single library, and certifies held-out description length in the spirit of PAC-Bayes lifelong learning [Pentina and Lampert, 2014]. 

Verifier-guided search is the engine. Because the controllers can only select among behaviors the frozen base already produces, a separate line of work supplies the variation and the dense signal they act on. Coverage under repeated sampling grows along an approximate exponentiated power law, yet only an automatic verifier turns that coverage into solved instances—majority vote and reward-model selection plateau as samples grow [Brown et al., 2024]. Closing the loop with the model’s own judgment, as Self-Refine [Madaan et al., 2023] and Reflexion [Shinn et al., 2023] do, stalls exactly where self-assessment fails. Our search (§5) departs on two axes. First, the feedback is 

executed verification rather than opinion: best-of-N keeps the candidate an executable verifier scores highest, and refinement is a strict verifier-scored hill-climb with backtracking. Second, the operators are wired into the certificate-gated controllers—best-of-N is A LG 4’s accept-gate pointed at patches, and process rewards feed A LG 3’s credit assignment. Where model-generated tests have been used for selection and self-debugging [Chen et al., 2023, 2024], our verifier (§5.2) keeps a strict firewall between the self-authored oracle that steers the search and the held-out grader that only measures it, admitting an oracle only if it fails on the unpatched base. 4

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

## 3 Architecture: Four Layers Around a Frozen Model 

The deployed agent at round t is the composition 

πt = L0 ◦ L(t)1 ◦ L(t)2 , (1) where the four layers, and the channels through which the five controllers act on them, are summarized in Figure 1: 

L0 — Base model. A frozen pre-trained LLM, accessed as a function LLM( prompt ) → text , op-tionally returning token log-probabilities. Never updated. 

L1 — Adapter. The trainable policy parameter θ. With open weights this would be a low-rank adapter [Hu et al., 2022], prefix [Li and Liang, 2021], or soft prompt [Lester et al., 2021]; the provider-agnostic realization is a steering adapter : a stochastic policy over a finite set of k

steering directives, parameterized by logits θ ∈ Rk with p = softmax( θ) (§3.1). 

L2 — Harness. Mutable orchestration: system prompt, tool definitions, step and exploration budgets, memory, the grown abstraction library, and a repair pipeline of adopted self-repair primitives (§5.4). Edited by A LG 4; grown by A LG 5; self-repaired online. Every structural edit changes the harness’s identity, so the policy version is well defined at all times. 

L3 — Loop controller. One of the five algorithms (or their composite). Holds certificates, gates, budgets, and archives; never part of the agent’s forward pass. The performative distribution D(πt) [Perdomo et al., 2020] is the distribution of (prompt, tool-call, environment-response) tuples the agent generates in deployment. Each round the controller emits a 

certificate —a structured audit record carrying the round’s decision ( ACCEPT /HOLD /REJECT /NSF ), the error budget spent, and algorithm-specific metrics. Certificates form the unified ledger by which a run can be audited after the fact. 

3.1 The policy substrate 

The pseudo-code in this paper is written against the following concrete objects. 

Steering adapter ( L1). The only trainable parameters are logits θ ∈ Rk over k steering directives— short natural-language strategy instructions appended to the system prompt. Each round the agent samples one directive, i ∼ softmax( θ), so the distribution over directives is an explicit softmax whose log-probability is known exactly on any backend. We never differentiate through the frozen model. The only gradient any controller uses is the closed-form score-function (REINFORCE) gradient of this softmax, 

∇θ log pθ (i) = 1i − softmax( θ), (2) which needs only the sampled index i and a softmax—no backpropagation, no model internals—and is therefore exact even on a text-only API. This is the gradient A LG 1 and A LG 3 consume. For the forgetting gate the same θ is read as a diagonal-Gaussian PAC-Bayes posterior Qθ = N (θ, diag ev )

with fixed log-variance v, so KL( Qθ ∥Q0) is just a scaled squared distance to the prior mean; the same vector supplies the ℓ2 distance and ball projection the trust region needs. No model Jacobian is ever formed: the “Jacobian memory” of orthogonal-gradient continual learning is approximated by a finite FIFO buffer of past closed-form gradients (2) (A LG 1), and true open-weights Jacobian buffers, though supported, are used in no reported run. Every committed policy is thus identifiable and auditable after the fact. 

Policy identity and distance. A policy’s version is determined by (L1, L 2); L0 is fixed. Policy distance is ∥θ − θ′∥2 plus a unit structural step if the harnesses differ—harness edits are discrete, and their performative effect is estimated from deployment rewards rather than from a norm. 

Deployment. DEPLOY (π, tasks ) runs all tasks concurrently and returns one rollout per task: the directive index used, the action, the tool trajectory, and a bounded reward R ∈ [0 , 1] from the environment. Two paths exist behind one interface: a single-call path (one LLM generation per task), and an actor path in which a multi-step tool-using agent (§7) produces the final action. An attempt index varies the sampling seed and the working directory, so independent attempts of the same (policy, task) pair are diverse and isolated—the substrate for best-of-N and refinement search (§5). Rollouts are appended to a persistent replay buffer, which A LG 3 and A LG 4 consume off-policy. 5

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

Table 1: The implementation’s ten numbered algorithms. ALG 1–A LG 5 are the scheduled L3

controllers of this section; A LG 6–A LG 10 are the verifier-in-the-loop and actor-side mechanisms of §5–§5.4. The five controllers remain the contribution; A LG 6–A LG 10 are the engine that feeds them. ALG 4 is omitted from the live SWE stack for wall-clock cost (§7) and best-of-2 (A LG 6) is removed from it (§9.1); both remain in the catalog.                                         

> Flag Mechanism Where Acts on
> alg1 PPB-CL: forgetting-gated continual learning §4.1, Alg. 1 L1
> alg2 PNMP-A: anchored preference learning §4.2, Alg. 2 reward q
> alg3 PA-COCOA: counterfactual credit assignment §4.3, Alg. 3 L1
> alg4 SGM-CS: confidence-gated harness edits §4.4, Alg. 4 L2
> alg5 SDC-QD: MDL+QD library growth §4.5, Alg. 5 L2
> alg6 verifier-gated best-of-N+refinement §5, Alg. 6 search
> alg7 verified micro-step search (fast loop) §5.1, Alg. 7 search
> alg8 self-authored reproduction oracles §5.2, Alg. 8 verifier
> alg9 search-layer controllers (A LG 1/A LG 3/A LG 4/A LG 5 re-aimed) §5.3, Alg. 9 search
> alg10 verified self-repair of the harness §5.4, Alg. 10 L2

Access levels. What a provider exposes determines what is implementable. API-text (text only) already suffices for every controller, because the trainable policy is the L1 softmax and its gradient (2) needs only sampled directive indices: A LG 1, A LG 2, and A LG 3 run even on local text-only servers, and A LG 4 and A LG 5 edit only L2. API-logprob adds sequence-level importance ratios; open weights 

would additionally allow gradients through the model itself and true Jacobian memory—neither of which is used here. 

## 4 The Five Loop Controllers 

Throughout, πt is the deployed configuration at round t; D(π) the induced data distribution; ε the performative sensitivity ( W1(D(π), D(π′)) ≤ ε∥π − π′∥); L the loss’s smoothness-to-curvature ratio (the condition number β/γ of Thm. 3.5 of Perdomo et al. [2020], so the contraction regime is 

εL < 1); δ0 a global error budget; and NSF (“no solution found”) the safe abstention output [Thomas et al., 2015, 2019]. All rewards are bounded in [0 , 1] ; the per-rollout loss is ℓ = 1 − R.

Two tiers, ten algorithms. The five controllers in this section (A LG 1–A LG 5) are the conceptual core. The reference implementation pairs them with five verifier-in-the-loop / actor-side mechanisms (A LG 6–A LG 10, §5–§5.4) that supply the signal and variation the controllers act on: gates can only 

select among existing behaviors, so the engine that generates and verifies those behaviors carries its own numbering. Table 1 is the full inventory. Pseudocode for all algorithms is collected in Appendix A. 

4.1 ALG 1: Performative PAC-Bayes Continual Learning (PPB-CL) Problem. The agent must acquire new skills without catastrophically forgetting old ones, on a stream it generates itself. The two natural seed results do not cover this setting: OGD’s forgetting guarantee assumes an exogenously indexed task sequence in the infinite-width regime [Farajtabar et al., 2020, Abbana Bennani et al., 2020], and time-uniform PAC-Bayes forgetting certificates [Chugg et al., 2023, Friedman and Meir, 2025] require a data-independent prior—which fails the moment the agent reuses its own evolving policy as a prior. The stream, the loss, and the prior are all endogenous here. 

Solution (Algorithm 1). Intuition. Damp each update by how much it would degrade a small anchor set of past tasks, and cap its size by the remaining forgetting budget. Concretely, keep the PAC-Bayes object small and the prior frozen—the posterior is a mean-parameterized diagonal Gaussian Qθ

over the steering adapter, with a frozen data-independent prior Q0. Each round, a performative batch is deployed and a REINFORCE gradient of the expected loss is formed from the sampled directive indices, with the baseline pooled over the recent replay window (a within-round baseline is identically zero at batch size one). The gradient is projected orthogonally off a FIFO buffer of the last m committed update directions (the OGD guard), and a candidate adapter is proposed by a single descent step. The candidate must pass three gates in sequence. (i) Forgetting gate : the candidate is 6

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

deployed on a small anchor set of past tasks, each stored with its best historical reward R∗ 

> j

(with M =1 

for rewards in [0 , 1] ; until anchors accumulate the gate passes vacuously); the empirical backward transfer bbt = 1

> |A|

P 

> j

[(1 − Rj ) − (1 − R∗ 

> j

)] enters the Donsker–Varadhan bound 

Bfgt (θ) = bbt( θ) + KL( Qθ ∥Q0) + log(2 √t/δ )

λ + λM 2

8|A| , (3) an instance of the anytime PAC-Bayes recipe of Chugg et al. [2023, Thm. 3.1]—which holds for precisely the adapted posterior sequences a self-evolving agent produces—via Ville’s inequality; the temperature is set per evaluation to its optimizer λ∗ = p8|A| At with At = KL( Qθ ∥Q0) + log(2 √t/δ ), collapsing the last two terms of (3) to pAt/(2 |A| ) (a fixed λ left the bound an order of magnitude above any usable threshold). If Bfgt > τ forget , the step is damped geodesically toward the incumbent by factor ρ and re-tested, up to five times. (ii) Performative trust region : the surviving slack τforget − Bfgt , divided by ε, caps the adapter step in ℓ2; a violating candidate is projected onto the ball and the bound re-evaluated. This is what keeps the induced shift inside the contraction regime of Perdomo et al. [2020]. (iii) Commit gate : the candidate commits only if Bfgt ≤ τforget 

and εL < 1; on commit, the projected gradient joins the buffer and the anchors absorb the round’s tasks with their best rewards. The certificate reports the empirical risk, KL , the time-uniform penalty q

(KL + log(2 √t/δ )) /2nt and risk bound, the forgetting bound, trust radius, and damping count. The pieces are published; their composition is an empirical construct we do not prove correct under the endogenous loop. Each ingredient is sound on its own—the time-uniform PAC-Bayes penalty of Chugg et al. [2023, Thm. 3.1], the Donsker–Varadhan backward-transfer forgetting bound of Friedman and Meir [2025, Thm. 3.1], and the performative contraction regime ε < γ/β of Perdomo et al. [2020, Thm. 3.5]—but whether they combine into an anytime-valid forgetting guarantee that survives the loop is a conjecture, not a theorem we establish. The capped direction buffer in particular forfeits the exact no-forgetting property of Abbana Bennani et al. [2020, Thm. 2], which assumes unbounded Jacobian memory; and the anytime floor of (3) grows with t, so τforget must sit above it or the gate freezes the learner. 

4.2 ALG 2: Performative Nash-MP with Real-Data Anchoring (PNMP-A) Problem. Recursive self-training and self-rewarding loops drift to degenerate fixed points: the policy exploits the reward model’s over-predictions, and the reward model is retrained on the policy’s own outputs [Gao et al., 2023, Shumailov et al., 2024]. The seeds each cover half the problem: constant-fraction real-data anchoring prevents data collapse [Fu et al., 2025] but says nothing about reward-model drift, while last-iterate Nash convergence [Tiapkin et al., 2025, Wang et al., 2025] assumes a fixed preference game. The loop must be protected against both simultaneously. 

Solution (Algorithm 2). Intuition. Mix a fixed reference anchor into every reward-model up-date and gate any update that drifts from it, while letting the policy chase the reward model on a slower timescale than the model settles. Two ideas do the work: separate the two risks onto two timescales [Borkar, 2008], and gate the slow one. The preference model is a Bradley–Terry score vector q ∈ Rk over directives, P (i ≻ j) = σ(qi − qj ), with a frozen anchor qreal (absent a held-out real-preference set the anchor defaults to the neutral zero vector, so in the SWE runs it prevents drift from neutrality rather than from human preferences). Synthetic preference pairs come from directives pooled over the recent replay window, the higher-mean directive winning. The slow timescale blends the synthetic Bradley–Terry gradient with a pull toward the anchor, 

qcand = q + aslow 

> t

α (qreal − q) + (1 − α) ∇q bLBT (q), aslow  

> t

= 12 (t+1) −1, (4) and is adopted only if it clears a drift gate: the per-pair deviations from the anchor, Xij = |σ(qcand  

> i

−

qcand  

> j

) − σ(qreal  

> i

− qreal  

> j

)|, feed a Hoeffding e-process testing H0 : E[X] ≤ τ , and rejection at the round’s CTHS level δk keeps the last safe model. The fast timescale moves the policy by a regularized Nash mirror-prox (extragradient) step on the logits, 

θt = θt−1 + afast  

> t

(θMP − θt−1), afast  

> t

= 12 (t+1) −0.7, (5) whose game gradient is the self-play advantage adv i(p) = P 

> j

pj σ(qi − qj ) and whose prox operator folds in the KL to the previous iterate and β times the KL to the reference policy (the two extragradient 7

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

half-steps are spelled out in Algorithm 2). Because aslow  

> t

/a fast  

> t

→ 0, the model settles faster than the policy chases it—the required timescale separation. A magnet z is refreshed every K rounds and 

KL( πt∥z) reported on the certificate; once the budget δ0 is spent the preference model freezes and only policy updates continue. Here too the components are published and the combination is an unproven, empirical construct. We borrow the constant-α bound on cumulative distribution shift in self-consuming training of Fu et al. [2025, Thm. 1], the geometric last-iterate self-play contraction (up to a residual floor) of Tiapkin et al. [2025, Prop. 1], and the anytime-valid familywise control of e-processes under harmonic spending [Ramdas et al., 2023, Wu et al., 2025]. Whether their two-timescale coupling converges to a performative equilibrium without collapse is a conjecture, not a result we prove; we claim no rate, and note that performative equilibria need not be unique and that the shift bound degrades as α → 0.

4.3 ALG 3: Performative-Aware COCOA (PA-COCOA) Problem. Long-horizon, sparse outcomes must be attributed across a multi-component agent stack while the transition and reward kernels move with the deployed policy [Mandal et al., 2023]. COCOA’s unbiasedness [Meulemans et al., 2023] holds under a fully-predictive outcome encoding— 

pπ (Rk=r | S0, A 0, U k=u) = pπ (R=r | U =u) for all k (their Def. 2)—with ground-truth contribu-tion coefficients (their Thm. 1), in a fixed MDP ; under endogenous drift the policy-induced shift is a hidden confounder, and the high-variance importance ratios of REINFORCE compound over the horizon. 

Solution (Algorithm 3). Intuition. Replace “reward × log-prob” with a counterfactual per-action contribution, condition on the deploying policy so policy drift stops confounding, and feed the result to a parameter-free learner that restarts on detected drift. Two moves realize this. First, augment the outcome encoding with the deploying policy, ˜U = ( U, π t), so the shift enters the conditioning set and stops confounding; concretely, every replay rollout carries its policy version and directive index, and the contribution model is estimated per directive over a recency-weighted replay window, with the policy-induced drift absorbed by the recency weighting rather than by explicit conditioning on the version (a deliberate simplification of the full (U, π t) encoder). The contribution model is thus a recency-weighted per-directive mean of episode rewards over the recent window (half-life h; weight 

2−age /h ; default 12 for unseen directives)—where the episode reward is the process reward ˜R of §5 when available, i.e. the best verifier state the episode reached rather than only its terminal submit. The augmented COCOA gradient then sums counterfactual contributions over all actions, eliminating the importance ratio; for the softmax steering adapter it has the closed form 

g = X

> a′

bw(a′) ∇θ pθ (a′) =   bw ⊙ p − p ⟨ bw, p ⟩, p = softmax( θ), (6) a simplified instance of the COCOA estimator in which credit attaches to the episode outcome rather than to per-step rewards. A mean-reverting exploration floor adds φ (1/k −p) to the gradient, keeping every directive sampled so its credit estimate stays fresh instead of collapsing onto one arm of an inflated signal. Second, hand the update to a learner that needs no learning rate and tracks drift: per-coordinate Krichevsky–Trofimov coin betting [Orabona and Pál, 2016] (the iterate is x = x0 + βtWt

with clipped betting fraction βt and per-coordinate wealth Wt), wrapped with drift-triggered restarts. A seeded wild-bootstrap trend test (§6) on the mean-reward stream signals non-stationarity and the bettor re-anchors at the current iterate—a restart-based surrogate for the strongly-adaptive guarantees that yield path-length dynamic regret eO(√T V T ) on every interval [Cutkosky, 2020], and the optimal 

eO(T 1/3V 2/3 

> T

) rate for strongly convex losses [Baby and Wang, 2022]. As before, every component is published and the composition is empirical, with no correctness proof in the performative setting. The unbiasedness of the counterfactual-contribution estimator under a fully-predictive encoding is Meulemans et al. [2023, Thm. 1], and Proposition 5 there already shows the hindsight model is invariant to conditioning on the policy logits within a deployment; the parameter-free dynamic-regret rates are Cutkosky [2020] (path-length eO(√T V T ) on every interval, with VT the comparator path length) and Baby and Wang [2022] ( eO(T 1/3V 2/3 

> T

) for strongly convex losses). Whether unbiasedness and these rates carry to the performative MDP [Mandal et al., 2023] across rounds is a conjecture we do not prove: a fully-predictive ˜U must be learnable, the recency-weighted contribution estimate reintroduces a bias their theorem does not cover, and the regret statement is vacuous once path variation VT grows linearly. 8

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

4.4 ALG 4: SGM Gated by Anytime-Valid Confidence Sequences (SGM-CS) Problem. A self-modification must be admitted only if it statistically improves the agent, with risk bounded across an unbounded sequence of self-proposed edits, where the proposal process is endogenous (it may exploit residual statistical slack) and a deployed edit changes the very distribution in which it is judged. 

Solution (Algorithm 4). Intuition. Admit a self-edit only through a sequential, peek-safe paired test that spends a shrinking per-edit slice of a global error budget—so familywise error stays bounded over an unbounded edit stream—and correct that test for the distribution shift the edit itself induces; abstain when in doubt. A LG 4 runs on API-text access, edits only L2, and is the governance layer to deploy first. The proposer is the frozen LLM acting on its own harness, cycling the three knobs of the explore/edit economy (§5): the forced-edit threshold, the step budget, and the strategy guidance. Baseline πt−1 and candidate πcand are deployed concurrently on the same task batch under common random numbers (aligned per-task seeds, isolated working copies), and the decision is a lower bound on the paired process -reward (Eq. 10) gain, corrected for performativity: 

LCB = CS lower 

> δk

 Rcand − Rbase 

 − ε · W1(Rcand , R base ), admit iff LCB ≥ − ϵtol . (7) The paired-difference confidence sequence is taken at the round’s CTHS level δk =

δ0/(Z k log 2(k+1)) (§6); the W1 term, computed exactly in 1-D from the samples, inflates the bound by the shift the edit induces; and per-version normal-mixture sequences [Howard et al., 2021] accumulate value evidence across rounds. Three details keep the test honest and cheap. (i) Two free guards spend nothing: an exhausted budget or a no-op proposal simply holds. (ii) A pre-gate pilot on the round’s best-evidenced (known-passable) task rejects ( NSF ) a candidate that shows no promise there, while an uninformative zero-reward pilot falls through to the full evaluation; the remaining tasks are then ranked so the comparison falls where evidence is weakest. (iii) A seeded wild-bootstrap trend test [Chandak et al., 2020], fed only by rounds that actually re-evaluated the baseline, widens the bound by one radius when the baseline-value stream is non-stationary. Otherwise the round returns NSF and the baseline is kept. The statistical components are published; their composition under an endogenous proposer is an empirical construct we do not prove safe. We reuse anytime-valid e-processes with familywise control under Ville’s inequality [Ramdas et al., 2023], the confirm-triggered harmonic spending of the Statistical Gödel Machine [Wu et al., 2025], the time-uniform confidence sequence of Howard et al. [2021], and the abstention semantics of safe policy improvement [Thomas et al., 2015, 2019]. Whether familywise safety survives the endogenous proposal process and the edit-induced distribution shift is open: the performative correction rests on a knowable bound for ε, and the wild-bootstrap widening [Chandak et al., 2020] was derived for exogenous non-stationarity, so under the endogenous loop it is a conservative heuristic. By construction the protocol favors safety over progress —it may rationally abstain ( NSF ) indefinitely. So that this conservatism never discards a good solution (as opposed to a good harness edit ), the SWE instantiation keeps a shadow-best : the highest-reward candidate patch seen across rounds is retained even when the harness-edit gate abstains, decoupling “which harness to deploy” (gated) from “which patch to submit” (best-so-far); and a rejected harness that nonetheless produced a strong patch is requeued for a later round, with eligibility keyed on an absolute reward threshold and a bounded per-harness retry count, and replayed only in a round whose active repositories include its own. 

4.5 ALG 5: Stitch-in-DreamCoder with Quality-Diversity Acceptance (SDC-QD) Problem. The agent must grow its own hypothesis space—invent reusable abstractions—while the corpus those abstractions are mined from is generated under the very library being learned. DreamCoder’s endogenous loop has no convergence or no-collapse theorem [Ellis et al., 2021]; Stitch’s MDL-optimal abstraction step is one-shot [Bowers et al., 2023]. A single converging library is the wrong target when corpus generation is endogenous. 

Solution (Algorithm 5). Intuition. Keep a quality-diversity archive of behaviorally distinct libraries rather than one “best” library, and add an abstraction only when it both reduces description length and occupies a new niche; each addition is the exact most-compressive one on the current corpus. Concretely, replace the single library with an archive over a frontier , and make each growth step exact. Programs are S-expressions with description length |ρ| equal to the node count, and the objective is the node-count MDL surrogate J(L; C) = |L| + P 

> ρ∈C

|ρ| of DreamCoder’s description-length 9

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

posterior over libraries [Ellis et al., 2021]. Each round, a wake phase asks the frozen LLM to synthesize one program per task under the current library (shown in the prompt; output is parsed defensively, since LLM output may be prose); programs whose environment score reaches the solve threshold join the corpus. The sleep phase runs Stitch-style compression: candidate patterns are all corpus subtrees plus all pairwise antiunifications of structurally compatible subtrees (differing positions become numbered holes), and the net utility of a pattern with body size b, arity a, and m

non-overlapping matches is u = m (b − 1 − a) − b (each match is rewritten as an application of size 

1 + a; the definition is paid once). Candidates are scanned in descending order of utility with an early dominance break, so the maximizer over the candidate set is exact (the soundness argument behind Stitch’s dominance pruning, Lemma 1 of Bowers et al. [2023]). The best abstraction A∗ is accepted only if (i) ∆J = u(A∗) ≥ umin , the minimum-utility bar (so a marginally compressive pattern does not enter the library), and (ii) the resulting library is novel or improving in a MAP-Elites archive keyed by the behavior descriptor ϕ = ( library size , mean solved-program size ) with fitness the post-compression MDL—so the run illuminates a (compression, coverage) frontier rather than converging to one point [Mouret and Clune, 2015, Cully and Demiris, 2018]. Accepted abstractions are surfaced as L2 harness entries the agent can call. A Hoeffding-type per-task description-length certificate, in the spirit of the PAC-Bayes lifelong-learning bound of Pentina and Lampert [2014], bounds expected per-task description length on held-out tasks: 

Enew task [DL] ≤ J(Lt; Ct)

|Ct| + |Lt||Ct| +

s

log(1 /δ )2|Ct| . (8) On the SWE agent (§7), the wake phase is replaced by the agent’s own behavior: successful trajectories, encoded as (tool , target ) operation sequences, become the corpus, and the mined macros become callable harness entries. The per-round compression step is exact and published; the loop around it is an empirical construct without a convergence proof. The single step is exact in the published sense: Lemma 1 of Bowers et al. [2023] shows that dominance pruning never discards the optimal abstraction, so the accepted macro is the most-compressive one on the current corpus (over the implemented candidate set), and MDL is monotone non-increasing under a fixed corpus. The held-out description-length certificate (Eq. 8) is Hoeffding/Occam-type—it carries no KL term and so is not itself a PAC-Bayes bound, but shares the Hoeffding-lemma core of the lifelong PAC-Bayes bound of Pentina and Lampert [2014]—and assumes an exchangeable task distribution that endogenous generation may violate. Convergence of the quality-diversity archive to a meaningful frontier is not a published result—no QD framework, including Cully and Demiris [2018], proves it—so we make no such claim; it is at most a conjecture, and the global limit need not be meaningful when corpus generation is endogenous. Every abstraction is a composition within a fixed typed λ-calculus; expanding the type system is beyond this algorithm. 

## 5 The Verifier as an In-Loop Control Signal 

Problem. The five controllers gate, select, and reshape: they act on the distribution of behaviors the frozen base model already produces. On hard agentic tasks that distribution offers a passive learner little. (i) The natural reward is terminal and binary —an instance is resolved or it is not—so a base that never fully resolves yields an identically zero signal and the loop has no gradient. (ii) Some failures are systematic, not stochastic : on certain instances a base re-runs the same attempt under temperature, returning identical partial patches and never the occasional good one, so selection over samples has no variance to exploit (an instance-level phenomenon, not a property of a whole model). (iii) Yet the same base is reliable at the micro-step —it can localize and emit an applying one-line edit—even when it gets the whole-patch content wrong; reliability lives at a finer granularity than the unit the loop scores. (iv) The interventions that helped were control-flow , not capability: forcing an edit after an exploration budget changes what the model does next, whereas coaxing latent quality does not. (v) The verifier—the one component that knows ground truth—was consulted once, after the episode, when nothing could be done about what it reported; this is exactly the regime in which selection, not generation, is the bottleneck [Brown et al., 2024]. The problem is to convert the verifier from a passive end-of-episode score into a control signal that acts inside the episode, across attempts, over the action space , and inside credit assignment , and to relocate both the search and the reward to the micro-step granularity where the base is reliable—without ever leaking gold labels. 10 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

Solution. A graded verifier and a family of search operators, all derived from test execution alone and all composable with every controller through the actor interface (the attempt-indexed deployment substrate of §3.1), building up to a verified micro-step search (§5.1). 

Graded verifier. A shaped milestone reward first decomposes the path to a resolve into rungs derived only from test execution: 0 for no parseable diff, 0.2 for a diff that does not apply, and 

0.4 + 0 .6 · frac f2p once tests run (halved and capped at 0.55 when pass-to-pass regressions appear), capped at 1. Because a whole batch of edits can sit at the same rung (every one applies but none passes a test), this is still too coarse to climb; the graded verifier adds two finer signals on top of the milestone score sshaped :

V =

(1 resolved 

min  0.99 , s shaped + ⊮[sshaped ≥ 0.4] ( wp ⊮[progressed ] + wj j) otherwise, (9) where the bonuses apply only once a patch has cleared the apply-and-run rung ( sshaped ≥ 0.4), 

progressed is true when the test’s failure signature moves (the last pytest error line, with volatile numbers and addresses masked, differs from the seed’s—so the edit got further before failing), 

j ∈ [0 , 1] is an auxiliary LLM judge, and the bonuses wp, w j are kept small ( 0.08 each) so an actual sub-test pass always outranks the heuristics and a non-resolved patch never reaches 1. Error-progression is the key addition: it turns a plateau of equally-applying patches into a gradient. The fail-to-pass fraction frac f2p here is computed from each instance’s held-out gold tests, so this graded score is reserved for terminal measurement (and offline development), exactly as a test set should be— never to steer the search. The dense signal the search actually climbs is supplied by a self-authored verifier that reads only the issue (§5.2). 

Closed-loop test execution. A run_tests tool lets the agent run the real target tests on its current 

edits mid-episode and read back actionable feedback: pass counts and the tail of the failure log. A short, typed repair instruction keyed to the failure class (a name or import error, an assertion mismatch, a syntax error, or a no-patch episode each map to a specific corrective hint) is injected into the guidance of the next refinement attempt (Algorithm 6), pairing each recorded failure with a concrete next step. The tool is stateful (its result depends on the current edits), so it is exempt from the agent’s duplicate-action guard. This changes the task from one-shot patch guessing to closed-loop debugging—the agent can edit, test, read a failure paired with a concrete next step, and iterate before submitting. 

Process reward. With the verifier callable mid-episode, credit assignment need not wait for the terminal submit. The process reward of an episode is the best verifier state it reached, 

˜R = max  Rterminal , max  

> j

sj

, (10) where sj is the shaped score at the agent’s j-th run_tests call. A trajectory that reached a good state and then regressed still carries credit; A LG 3’s contribution model (Algorithm 3) consumes ˜R in place of the terminal reward. 

ALG 6: Verifier-gated best-of-N and refinement search (Algorithm 6). Across attempts, two search operators sit on top of any actor. B EST OFN runs n independent, diverse attempts (the attempt index varies the sampling seed and the working directory) and keeps the one the verifier scores highest: under independent attempts, a per-attempt resolve probability p becomes 1 − (1 − p)n—a strict lift whenever p > 0. Empirically, coverage under repeated sampling grows along an approximate exponentiated power law in n, and a ground-truth verifier is exactly the selector that converts coverage into solved instances [Brown et al., 2024]. R EFINE is a sequential hill-climb: each attempt after the first is seeded with the best patch so far and the verifier’s explanation of why it failed , the new candidate is scored on the original task, and it replaces the incumbent only if strictly better—otherwise the search backtracks to the best known patch. Refinement stops early on a full resolve. We removed 

best-of-2 from the live stack: the run logs show it never produced a second attempt (the attempt count stays 1) and, run in isolation, degraded the apply-rate, so it is reported here as a designed operator rather than a live component (§9.1). Selecting by the verifier is A LG 4’s accept-gate pointed at patches; keeping the best over diverse samples is the selection principle of A LG 5—here applied at test time, within a single task. 11 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

Enforced explore →edit budget. Over the action space, the harness gains a tunable threshold 

bexplore : once the agent has spent bexplore read-only steps ( search /read /list ) without landing an edit, it is first warned to edit and then, after a short grace window of a few further explores under escalating pressure, the exploration tools are disabled until an edit is made. The grace window is not cosmetic: a hard cap with no grace deadlocked a mid-localization agent into a no-op read loop that produced an empty patch, whereas the graded pressure let the same agent land its edit (in one live case turning an empty patch into a correctly localized fix). This converts the diagnosed over-exploration failure from a property of the model into a property of the harness—and the harness is governed: bexplore is a knob in A LG 4’s proposer cycle (Algorithm 4), so tightening it must survive the confidence-sequence gate like any other self-edit. 

5.1 ALG 7: Verified micro-step search (the fast loop) 

Best-of-N and refinement search over whole patches , where a weak base is unreliable and near-deterministic. The fast loop (Algorithm 7) instead searches over verified micro-steps : from the current best patch and the verifier’s failure feedback, a reasoning-first generator (first name the root cause, class, and method; then emit edits) proposes k materially different one-line hypotheses, diversity forced by the prompt against a working memory of past failures rather than by sampling temperature. Each hypothesis is composed onto the current best and scored only if it applies. Three components keep the search efficient: a beam of width b over verified partial patches; the working memory of tried edits and distinct failure signatures, rendered into the prompt to suppress repeats; and a cheap-to-expensive verification cascade (a parse/apply check, then the native fail-to-pass run only on survivors) that confines the minute-long test run to compiling patches. The search halts on a pass and gives up when a full round of fresh hypotheses moves nothing. Hypotheses may be pooled across several base models into one verified beam. 

5.2 ALG 8: The in-loop verifier — self-authored reproduction oracles Problem. The search needs a dense, per-candidate signal to climb, but the held-out gold tests must be reserved for unbiased terminal measurement—a learner that is allowed to consult its own test set will report progress that does not generalize. So the in-loop verifier must be computable from the 

issue alone , using no information from the gold tests, the test patch, or the fail-to-pass/pass-to-pass lists, while still being informative enough to tell a real fix from a near-miss. 

Solution (Algorithm 8). Intuition. Reproducing a described bug is easier than fixing it, so the model writes tests from the issue, keeps only those that fail on the unpatched code, and debugs against them; the held-out tests are touched only at the end, to report whether the self-authored verifier was right. Concretely, a verifier model reads only the issue text (and, optionally, repository source) and writes minimal scripts that assert the correct expected behavior, so each script should fail on the buggy code and pass once the bug is fixed. The leverage is asymmetric: reproducing a described bug is a higher-success task than fixing it—the issue states the symptom, the model need only encode it—so a model unreliable at fixing can still author a usable verifier. 

Admission. An oracle is kept only if it fails on the unpatched base (a check that already passes on the buggy code captures nothing), with two cheap rejections: timeouts, and failures that are unambiguously the script’s own fault, i.e. a syntax or indentation error. An import or name error is deliberately not auto-rejected—a bug whose very symptom is a broken import must remain admissible—and a symptom judge then demotes any oracle whose base failure does not match the issue’s stated symptom. To improve recall (whether a usable oracle gets built at all), oracles are pooled across an ensemble of verifier models, so a verifier exists whenever any model authors one; this only trades precision in a safe direction, since a spurious oracle can make the score under -claim (a correct patch fails to flip an over-strict check) but can never mark a wrong patch correct. 

Extracting the signal. Let A be the admitted oracle suite. A candidate patch ρ is run once (prepared a single time, then every oracle executed against it), and its scalar score is the fraction of admitted oracles it flips from failing to passing, voided if any previously-passing check regresses: 

Vself (ρ) = { o ∈ A : o fails on base , o passes on ρ }

|A| if no green check regresses, else 0. (11) A patch is promising (we never say “resolved”) when every admitted oracle flips and nothing regresses. Here Vself is the flip fraction (the regression-voiding term is optional), and the held-out grader runs 12 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

the fail-to-pass directives, so “the grader agrees” means the gold target tests flip. The searcher is the multi-step tool-using agent, whose run_tests tool returns Vself rather than the grader, so it debugs against a signal it authored; a robust search-and-replace applier (an edit’s anchor must match exactly once, with a unique whitespace-normalized fuzzy fallback and a nearest-match hint on a miss) turns the model’s edits into a clean diff so even a weak solver emits applying patches without silent wrong-site edits. The held-out grader is invoked only once, on the finalized patch, to measure whether Vself was right. Around the single admission rule the implementation adds three safeguards: rejected oracles are refined for a bounded number of rounds (each re-prompt carries the reason for rejection, stopping at the first admission); a quality gate demotes weak oracles whose assertions are negative-only; and oracle code must ground itself in symbols actually extracted from the issue text, with a stoplist rejecting generic tokens. 

The no-oracle path. When no oracle is admitted, the only gold-free evidence is that related pre-existing tests still pass—necessary, not sufficient. This path is hardened in three ways. A fully green but unverified verdict is capped at 0.9 with an explicit “nothing verified the issue itself is fixed” note, so best-of-N , refinement, verify-react, and the cross-round memory stay armed exactly where verification signal is weakest. Candidates that tie at the cap are split by a gold-free issue-fidelity judge 

(issue text plus the two patches, one-token verdict). A regression veto keyed on the failing phrase prevents an oracle pass from masking a broken pre-existing test, and a collection-error parser closes the remaining false-green channel (a test run that dies during collection no longer reads as green). 

Why measurement stays honest. Because Vself is a function only of the issue text and the repository’s own behavior, the held-out tests play no role in steering the search; their single terminal call measures the result without having shaped it. The price is that Vself is fallible —it can call a patch promising that the grader rejects, or miss a fix its oracles did not cover—which is exactly why a patch is reported as “promising,” never “resolved,” and why agreement between the self-oracle verdict and the independent terminal grader (§9) is the quantity we report. 

5.3 From search to weights: the slow loop and re-aimed controllers 

The fast loop raises quality at test time; a slow loop would amortize it into weights by collecting verified micro-step trajectories (label-free positive data—they passed the tests) and distilling them into a low-rank adapter by reject sampling [Zelikman et al., 2022, Gulcehre et al., 2023]. The slow loop is designed but not trained in any reported run (§10). The five controllers are re-aimed from the single-pass actor onto this scaffold (Table 2); four act on the search layer, reuse the primitives of §6, wrap the beam search of Algorithm 7 and the continual stream of Algorithm 9, and are validated only 

by deterministic offline gate simulations, not live: • ALG 4 becomes a compute-allocation controller: an anytime-valid confidence sequence on the per-round marginal graded gain stops a branch once even its optimistic bound clears no further expected gain (a rigorous campaign-level allocator that bounds false-abandonment, plus a cheap per-instance plateau fast-path), reclaiming the expensive verifier budget for productive instances. • ALG 5 becomes the branch diversity generator : a MAP-Elites archive over a behavior descriptor keeps one elite per behavior cell, so the beam spends its width on behaviorally distinct partial patches rather than b minor variants of one edit—the direct cure for the no-variance failure. • ALG 3 becomes step-level credit : a recency-weighted mean of verified reward per branch class (the edited file) orders which step macro to try first, so the search stops re-discovering the same productive edit shape on every problem. • ALG 1 becomes an anchored forgetting gate : an update to the evolved search/distilled policy is accepted only if a re-evaluation of frozen earlier-repo tasks does not regress. The fifth, A LG 2, guards the slow loop : it is the mode-collapse defense for the distillation step (an e-value drift gate on trajectory diversity), and is realized only once the slow loop trains—which the present system does not yet do, so A LG 2 at the search layer remains design. 

5.4 ALG 10: Verified self-repair of the harness Problem. A search is only as good as its operators. In the fast loop, a recurring harness failure— roughly half of the pooled ensemble’s candidate edits failed to apply, because the model copied 13 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

Table 2: The five controllers re-aimed from the single-pass actor onto the two-loop (search-then-distill) scaffold. Four are built on the search layer and validated by deterministic offline gate simulations; the slow-loop anti-collapse guard awaits the distillation training step.                       

> Controller Acts on Re-aimed role in the two-loop scaffold Status ALG 4 SGM-CS fast loop anytime-valid compute-allocation stopping : halt a branch/instance when the confidence sequence on marginal progress shows no expected gain built, gate-sim ALG 5 SDC-QD fast loop quality-diversity archive as the branch diversity generator ; mine step-level macros from verified sub-sequences built, gate-sim ALG 3 PA-COCOA fast loop step-level credit over branch / hypothesis classes, off-policy from the verified-trace buffer built, gate-sim ALG 1 PPB-CL slow loop anchored forgetting gate : accept a policy update only if earlier-repo scores hold built, gate-sim ALG 2 PNMP-A slow loop guard the distillation loop against mode-collapse (e-value drift gate on trajectory diversity) design (awaits training)

search text from the issue’s diff (lines marked +/−) rather than from the current file—starves the search of valid candidates. This is exactly the kind of systematic failure a self-evolving agent should fix itself . The tempting response is a human hand-patch (“strip the diff markers from search ”); but a hand-patch is an unverified belief about the failure’s cause, and acting on it is precisely the trust the rest of the paper forbids. 

Solution (Algorithm 10). The harness carries an evolvable repair pipeline —a list of adopted repair primitives, an L2 component like A LG 5’s grown library—applied to every hypothesis before it is composed. Providing a repertoire of small, composable primitives (de-marking a diff into verbatim search/replace, stripping code fences, whitespace-fuzzy matching against the actual file) is not hand-patching: the loop selects and verifies which to activate. The gate (P ROPOSE REPAIRS ) takes the candidates that just failed to compose and, for each library primitive, measures the fraction it makes actually apply against the real composer, adopting only those clearing a threshold, best-first; a repair is credited only when it genuinely changes the hypothesis, so an inert primitive earns nothing. A second, generation-level gate verifies prompt-suffix repairs by re-generating and re-composing, adopting a suffix only if it beats the un-amended apply-rate by a margin. Both gates ground adoption in execution, never in a prior. The grown repertoire is the natural target of A LG 5 (which can add primitives) and the per-instance selection is the natural target of A LG 4’s confidence-gated acceptance. The mechanism earned its keep by refusing a fix: run over the real recorded failures, the diff-de-marking primitive cleared the gate on 0 of 34 candidates—the dominant failure was not naive diff prefixes but search text targeting code the seed patch had already replaced, which no text rewrite can recover—so the verification gate rejected the hand-patch a human would have shipped, and instead adopted a generation-level repair where re-generation raised the measured apply-rate ( 33% → 50% 

on one anchor) and declined it where re-measurement showed no gain ( 83% → 83% on another). These are single-instance observations, not a controlled evaluation. Whether each mechanism lifts a given base model—and which failures are stochastic (where best-of-N and refinement have variation to exploit) versus systematic (where the budget enforcement, micro-step relocation, and self-repair bind)—is what the protocol of §8 measures; §9 reports the study that has concluded. 

## 6 The Anytime-Valid Statistical Core 

Every controller monitors its own running statistics and may stop, accept, or restart at any round. The shared danger is therefore the same throughout: a fixed-sample test is invalid the moment a controller peeks at its own numbers. The primitives below are the standard tools that stay valid under such continuous peeking; we lead each with what it buys the loop, then give the formula. 

Normal-mixture confidence sequences—an error bar valid at every round. A confidence sequence is an interval that holds for all n at once, so a controller can read it after every round without inflating its error rate. For σ-sub-Gaussian increments with partial sum Sn and intrinsic time 14 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

Vn = nσ 2, the mixture supermartingale Mn = pρ/ (ρ + Vn) exp {S2

> n

/2( ρ + Vn)} gives, through Ville’s inequality, the time-uniform radius 

|Sn|

n ≤ 1

n

r

(ρ + Vn)



2 log 2 

> α

+ log ρ+Vn

> ρ



simultaneously for all n, (12) with ρ tuned to tighten the boundary near a target sample size [Howard et al., 2021]. (The 2 log(2 /α )

is a conservative union of two one-sided boundaries; the exact two-sided boundary of Howard et al. [2021, Eq. 14] carries 2 log(1 /α ).) This is the value evidence A LG 4 accumulates per policy version. 

Hoeffding e-processes—a bankroll that detects drift. An e-process is a wealth process that grows in expectation only when the null is false, so a controller can bet against “no drift” and call drift the moment the wealth crosses 1/δ , safely at any stopping time. Concretely, Q 

> i

exp( λiXi − λ2 

> i

/8) with predictable λi is an e-process and rejection at Et ≥ 1/δ is anytime-valid [Ramdas et al., 2023]; the bet is a GROW-style plug-in that tilts λ toward the observed mean excess using only past data, so it grows fast when drift is real. This is A LG 2’s reward-model drift gate. 

Horizon-free confirm-triggered harmonic spending (CTHS)—one error budget split over un-boundedly many edits. To keep familywise error below δ0 across an open-ended stream of accepted edits, the per-edit budgets must sum to δ0. The SGM schedule δt = δ0/(t H B ), HB = P 

> i≤B

1/i ,achieves this but pre-commits a finite horizon B [Wu et al., 2025], which a self-evolving agent lacks. A horizon-free schedule must stay summable on its own: the obvious choice δ0/(2 k log 2(k + 1)) in fact over-spends ( P 

> k

≈ 1.69 δ0), silently breaking validity, so the k-th confirmation instead spends 

δk = δ0

Z k log 2(k + 1) , Z = X

> j≥1

1

j log 2(j + 1) ≈ 3.39 , (13) with Z evaluated by an analytic tail correction so that P 

> k

δk = δ0 exactly—familywise validity with no horizon. 

Parameter-free coin betting with restarts—an optimizer with no learning rate. ALG 3 must track a moving optimum without a tuned step size, so it casts each update as a betting game. A per-coordinate KT bettor [Orabona and Pál, 2016] keeps wealth Wt and betting fraction βt = 1

> t

P 

> i<t

ci

(clipped to ± 12 ) with normalized reward direction ci = −gi/G i (Gi a running Lipschitz estimate), playing xt = x0 + βtWt; this gives comparator-adaptive O(∥u∥√T log T ) regret with no learning rate to set. Drift re-anchors x0 at the current iterate—a restart surrogate for the strongly-adaptive methods that attain path-length dynamic regret on every interval [Cutkosky, 2020] and the optimal 

eO(T 1/3V 2/3 

> T

) rate for strongly convex losses [Baby and Wang, 2022]. 

Exact 1-D Wasserstein and sensitivity estimation—how far an edit moved the distribution. 

The performative correction (A LG 4) needs the distance between the reward distributions before and after an edit; in one dimension this W1 is exact, computed by integrating the gap between empirical CDFs over the merged support. The sensitivity ε is then the non-negative through-origin slope of W1

shifts against adapter-norm deltas on probe pairs, and the contraction check bεL < 1 is exposed to the controllers. 

Wild-bootstrap trend test—is the baseline drifting under us? Before trusting a logged value stream, the loop tests it for a trend by re-signing the OLS residuals (around a no-trend fit) with Rademacher ±1 multipliers [Chandak et al., 2020]; the test is robust to heteroskedasticity and heavy tails and is seeded for reproducibility. A LG 3 restarts and A LG 4 widens its bound when it fires. 

Weighted importance sampling—reusing old rollouts. To value a new policy from rollouts logged under older ones, self-normalized weighted IS with clipped log-ratios and an effective-sample-size diagnostic reweights the history, and per-trajectory IS-weighted returns are shaped so a confidence sequence wraps them directly. 

MDL compression and QD archives. Finally, A LG 5 draws on Stitch-style antiunification com-pression (§4.5) and a MAP-Elites grid archive with coverage, best-elite, and Pareto-frontier queries. 15 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

## 7 Composite Two-Timescale Control and the Self-Evolving SWE Agent 

Actor protocol. The controllers are written against a single-deployment interface; an actor protocol lets the same controllers drive a multi-step, tool-using agent: the actor turns (policy, task, attempt) into a final action plus the full tool trajectory and the episode’s process reward, recording which L1

strategy directive was sampled (controllers may force a fixed directive—A LG 4 compares harnesses under directive 0—or let the actor sample on-policy, as A LG 3 requires). Every controller then works unchanged with the multi-step agent, and the search operators of §5 wrap any actor without modification. 

The SWE agent. The evolvable actor is a multi-step, tool-using agent (ReAct-style [Yao et al., 2023]) over a structured action vocabulary (Appendix E): list , search , read , edit (unique search-and-replace with a whitespace-fuzzy fallback), run_tests , submit , executed against a working copy at the pre-fix revision with capped observations. Accumulated edits form the candidate patch, so it applies by construction. It reads strategy guidance, the grown macro library, step budget, and exploration threshold from the harness, with the sampled L1 directive composed into the system prompt; each attempt’s working copy and best-result archive are keyed by (policy version, directive, attempt), so A LG 4’s concurrent baseline/candidate arms and best-of-N attempts stay isolated. 

Composite controller (Algorithm 11). A scheduler runs any subset of the five over one shared evolving policy : each sub-controller is wrapped as (name, controller, period) and runs when t mod 

period = 0 ; period 0 disables it—the ablation mechanism. Before a sub-controller steps, it receives the current shared policy; after, its (possibly edited) policy is propagated to the next. Each algorithm edits only its own layer through operations that preserve the other layer, so the edits compose. Sub-certificates are merged into one ledger row: metrics are prefixed per algorithm, error spends are summed, and the round’s decision is the highest-precedence sub-decision ( ACCEPT ≻ NSF ≻ REJECT 

≻ HOLD ). Default periods realize the two-timescale split: L1 controllers (A LG 3 or A LG 1) every round; L2 controllers (A LG 4, A LG 5) every 2 rounds; A LG 2 every 3. A LG 1 and A LG 3 both train 

L1, so enabling both together is discouraged. An optional cost-aware mode makes the scheduler itself a compute allocator: it tracks a per-controller no-gain counter, reset only on committed output (an accepted edit, a shadow-accepted patch, a committed macro, or mined anti-macros—raw activity such as solve counts or uncommitted compression gain never trips it), and temporarily skips a slow 

L2 controller that has shown no committed gain for a few consecutive rounds. A skipped controller is left one round short of the threshold, so a dead controller settles into a probe/skip alternation—a scheduler-level echo of A LG 4’s per-search compute-allocation stop. 

Division of labor. On the SWE agent the controllers specialize. A LG 4 proposes and gates harness edits (force-edit threshold, step budget, strategy guidance) against the paired process reward (Eq. 10) at CTHS levels, with the pre-gate pilot, common-random-number pairing, and shadow requeue of §4.4. A LG 5 mines recurring (tool , target ) sub-sequences from high-reward trajectories into macros (and failure signatures into anti-macros), admitting a macro only if it clears a downstream-utility 

gate—positive newer-vs-older reward lift on its context—not merely an MDL gain; the library is capped per (repository, status) context and self-prunes by a trailing-window retirement pass, so the certificate reports compression gain only for committed macros. A LG 3 performs counterfactual credit assignment over rollouts to steer the directive adapter (directives such as explore broadly ,

localize and edit early , smallest diff ), weighting credit per active repository family and excluding ALG 4’s rejected-candidate arms. A LG 1 protects the adapter with the forgetting gate; A LG 2 anchors any preference model. The cost-aware skip (above) matters here because a scheduled A LG 4 round costs ∼90 vs. ∼7 min for the rest of the composite combined (three concurrent multi-step deploys). 

## 8 Experimental Setup 

Benchmark and grading. SWE-bench Verified—the 500-instance human-validated subset [Chowd-hury et al., 2024] of SWE-bench [Jiménez et al., 2024]—evaluated with the official execution-based harness: for each instance the repository is restored to the state preceding the fix, the candidate patch is applied, and the project’s real test suite is run. Resolved requires every fail-to-pass test to pass and every pass-to-pass test to keep passing. The working sample is a seeded random draw of 52 instances (24 Django, 27 Matplotlib, 1 Flask). 16 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

Table 3: Model × stack on a fixed 52 -instance SWE-bench Verified subset (identical harness, official execution-based grader; resolved counts). The full stack improves every base. For the first four models “off” is the single-pass baseline, so the on −off ∆ also includes a small scaffolding/directive effect (a no-op control on G PT isolates the algorithm contribution at +5 , §9.1); for G LM 5.2 the “off” cell is that no-op control (its single-pass baseline was not run), so its +4 is already scaffolding-free.                                

> Base model off Alg.–A ∆(on −off) GEMMA (gemma4:31b-mlx ,∼31B q.) 18 22 +4
> QWEN (qwen3.6:27b ,∼27B) 24 25 +1
> GPT -MINI (gpt-5.4-mini )25 29 +4
> GPT (gpt-5.5 )28 34 +6
> GLM (GLM 5.2) ⋆24 28 +4
> ⋆GLM 5.2 “off” =no-op control (scaffolding on, algorithms off).

Rewards. Three bounded rewards are available to the loop. Proxy : file-overlap F1 between predicted and gold patches (inner-loop development only, never for claims). Native : real test execution, the fraction of fail-to-pass tests passing. Shaped : the dense milestone reward of §5. The signal live runs actually climb is the self-authored verifier of §5.2; the gold tests are reserved for terminal grading. 

Base models and backends. The study crosses four frozen base models, accessed only as L0; none is fine-tuned. Two are open-weight checkpoints served locally with their separate reasoning channel disabled for structured output: G EMMA (gemma4:31b-mlx , a ∼31B model at nvfp4 quantization) and Q WEN (qwen3.6:27b , ∼27B). Two are frontier reasoning models behind the same interface: GPT -MINI (gpt-5.4-mini , low reasoning effort) and G PT (gpt-5.5 , reasoning disabled—the strongest base in the set), each with a 4k-token completion cap. A fifth model, G LM 5.2, is run with the no-op control and the full suite (Table 3); its single-pass baseline was not run, so its “off” cell is the control. Adapter log-probabilities are exact on every backend because the steered policy is the L1

directive layer. 

The 4 × 2: four models × algorithms off/on. Each base model is run with the algorithm stack off and on , on all 52 instances, under the identical harness and the same official execution-based grader—eight cells, one grading protocol. No algorithms is the bare multi-step actor of §7 alone—no controllers, no search, no in-loop test runner—one episode per instance under a 

10 -step budget. Algorithms–A (the full composite) enables eight of the ten algorithms of Table 1: ALG 1/A LG 2/A LG 3/A LG 5 scheduled as certificate controllers and the verifier-tier mechanisms ALG 7–A LG 10 active—verified micro-step search (A LG 7), the self-authored oracles of §5.2 at two samples (A LG 8) with the unverified-green cap and tie-break judge, search-layer step-credit (A LG 9), and verified self-repair (A LG 10)—with A LG 4 disabled for wall-clock cost (§7) and best-of-2 (A LG 6) removed (§9.1). Each instance is solved once (re-touches return the cached result). The harness, sample, step budget, and grader are held fixed across all eight cells, so the only varying factors are the base model and the stack. 

## 9 Results and Discussion 

Two results stand out. First, base capability is a large, confound-free effect: single-pass baselines on the identical harness scale cleanly—G EMMA 18 < QWEN 24 < GPT -MINI 25 < GPT 28 (Table 3)— and the ordering is preserved with the full stack ( 22 , 25 , 29 , 34 ). Second, the full stack improves every base (on −off +1 to +6 ), and where we deconfounded it with a no-op control on two strong models the suite’s contribution is +5 (G PT ) and +4 (G LM 5.2)—attributable to the algorithms, not to scaffolding (§9.1); the best configuration is G PT +Algorithms–A at 34 /52 (65% ). 

9.1 Deconfounded single-base ablation 

To separate the algorithms from the scaffolding they run inside, we ran a deliberate no-op composite 

control on G PT —the full composite scaffolding with strategy directives on but every algorithm disabled. It scores 29 against the single-pass baseline 28 , so the directive/scaffolding effect is only 17   

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50%
> 18
> 22
> +4
> GEMMA
> 24 25
> +1
> QWEN
> 25
> 29
> +4
> GPT -MINI
> 28
> 34
> +6
> GPT
> 24
> 28
> +4
> GLM
> resolved / 52
> off Algorithms–A

Figure 2: Across models. Resolved instances (of 52 ) per base model with the stack off (grey) and on (green); models ordered by baseline. Absolute resolution scales with base capability in both conditions. The on −off difference (annotated +N ) includes a small scaffolding/directive effect, except for G LM 5.2 whose “off” bar is the no-op control (§9.1), making its +4 already scaffolding-free. Table 4: G PT (gpt-5.5 ) single-algorithm ablation, one run per cell, same 52 instances and grader. The no-op composite (directives on, all algorithms off) is the deconfounded control; the full suite reaches 34 , +5 over it. A LG 4’s 36 is not an algorithm effect—its gate accepted 0 edits, so it ran the control configuration (caught by the event log). 

Config resolved / 52 note single-pass baseline 28 no strategy directive no-op composite (control) 29 directives on, algorithms off ALG 1 30 

ALG 2 34 directive learner ( +5 over control) ALG 3 31 

ALG 4 36 0 accepts — ran control config ALG 5 28 ≈ 0 accepts ALG 6 26 best-of-2; never fired, apply failures — removed ALG 7 32 micro-step search ALG 8 32 self-oracles ALG 9 29 

ALG 10 30 

full suite 34 +5 over control 

+1 ; the full suite reaches 34 , a +5 gain over the proper control, attributable to the algorithms themselves . A second strong model, G LM 5.2, gives the same picture (Table 3, Fig. 2): 24 with the algorithms off and 28 with them on, a +4 gain. The deconfounded contribution of the suite is thus positive on both models we controlled ( +5 and +4 )—a single run per cell, but a consistent direction across two models. Decomposing the G PT suite into single-algorithm runs (Table 4, Fig. 3) localizes the contribution. Re-anchored to the 29 control, several algorithms contribute alone: A LG 2 +5 (the strategy-directive learner), A LG 7/A LG 8 +3 (micro-step search, self-oracles), A LG 3 +2 ; the full suite reaches the best single component, consistent with overlapping rather than additive gains. Two honest reads: ALG 6 (best-of-2) is net-negative ( 26 ) and, per the run logs, never produced a second attempt while adding patch-apply failures, so we remove it from the live stack; and A LG 4’s 36 is not an algorithm effect—its confidence-sequence gate accepted zero edits, so it ran the control configuration and the count is a high draw, which the event-log attribution (not the raw count) caught. These are single-run figures (§10 collects the limitations and next steps). 18 

2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved 0 10 20 30                         

> control 29
> baseline 28
> control 29
> ALG 130
> ALG 234
> ALG 331
> ALG 436
> ALG 528
> ALG 626
> ALG 732
> ALG 832
> ALG 929
> ALG 10 30
> full 34
> resolved / 52

Figure 3: Single-base ablation (G PT , gpt-5.5 ). Resolved instances for each single-algorithm config, the no-op composite control (29 , dashed), the single-pass baseline ( 28 ), and the full suite (34 ); one run per cell (Table 4). Most configs sit near the control; the full suite and A LG 2 are highest (green). A LG 4’s 36 is an artifact—its gate accepted 0 edits, so it ran the control—and A LG 6(best-of-2, removed) is below the control (both red). Single runs on expensive evaluations; per-cell deltas are not separated from run-to-run variance. 

9.2 What the mechanisms verifiably do 

The variance-immune evidence is in the event logs (decisions, accepts, oracle admissions, veto and react/refine firings), which pass-count noise does not touch. Log analysis suggests the measurable lever inside the stack is more closed-loop debugging , driven by the self-oracle (A LG 8) and reflected in the full suite: relative to the control, run_tests calls rise by ∼50% and mean episode length by 

∼1.3 steps—the agent iterates against its self-authored tests rather than guessing once. Among the certificate controllers, the ones that fire every round are the directive learners A LG 2 and A LG 3 ( 52 

policy updates each; A LG 2 is the top single-algorithm cell at 34 ); the gated, library, and forgetting controllers A LG 4, A LG 5, A LG 1 contribute less. On this evidence the suite’s live value is carried by ALG 2/A LG 3 (directive shaping) and A LG 7/A LG 8 (verified search and self-oracle). Consistent with selection-not-creation, the stack does not destabilize a base—added regressions are few (full suite 4 p2p-flagged instances vs. 3 for the control)—and a consensus-flip analysis separates signal from noise: a robust subset of G PT instances flips under several distinct configs while single-config flips are noise-like; 17 /52 are solved by every config and 10 by none. 

Position. Two levers move the metric, and they are not interchangeable. Within a fixed base the lever is the algorithm suite, whose deconfounded gain is carried by A LG 2/A LG 3 (directive shaping) and ALG 7/A LG 8 (verified search and self-oracle). For absolute resolution the lever is a stronger base: the 10 instances solved by no configuration—mostly Matplotlib—are a capability/harness wall that more search does not move. 

## 10 Limitations 

The endogenous-loop guarantees remain open conjectures: each controller’s statistical primitives are individually published and sound, but their compositions—the two-timescale coupling in A LG 2, the backward-transfer reduction in A LG 1, the performative corrections in A LG 1 and A LG 4—are not proven here, and several rest on assumptions the endogenous loop itself erodes (a stationary held-out real set for A LG 2; a learnable fully-predictive augmented outcome and bounded comparator 19 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

path variation for A LG 3; exchangeable task generation for A LG 5). The performative sensitivity ε

is a behavioral constant taken as a hyperparameter; it is not estimable online with its own validity guarantee, and the contraction condition εL < 1 may fail at LLM scale. The anytime-validity that makes the gates sound also makes them conservative: PAC-Bayes terms grow vacuous for high-dimensional posteriors, the DV forgetting floor rises with t, and A LG 4 guarantees safety, not progress. A boundary we state up front: controllers and verifier-guided search select, gate, and reshape the behavior of the frozen base; they cannot manufacture capability it lacks. This bounds the absolute ceiling , which the base sets; within that ceiling the suite’s gains (§9.1, §9.2) are real but measured as single runs on expensive evaluations, so we report magnitudes rather than significance. The self-oracle is fallible by design—it can under-claim (an over-strict oracle fails to flip a correct patch) and over-claim (a false-green pass)—so a patch is reported as “promising,” never “resolved,” the terminal grader being authoritative. A proper ablation across diverse harnesses and base models is also outstanding and, we think, the most informative next step: with one harness and a single sample per cell we can say the suite as a whole helps, but not which algorithm is advantageous for which 

type of problem—the matching of controllers to problem structure (stochastic vs. systematic failures, short vs. long horizons, repository families) can only be settled by a factorial study that varies harness and model together. Finally, each cell is a single run (no per-controller multi-seed isolation) and the slow-loop distillation is designed but not trained; repeated runs, a stronger-base confirmation, the per-task algorithm–problem ablation, and the distillation step are the remaining experiments. 

## 11 Conclusion 

SEA confines self-evolution of an LLM agent to a frozen base plus a small steering adapter and a versioned harness, and admits each self-modification through an anytime-valid gate that certifies it against a budgeted error ledger. Five controllers compose published guarantees, and five verifier-in-the-loop mechanisms—including a self-authored reproduction-oracle verifier computed from the issue alone—supply the dense, grader-free signal those gates need. On a 52 -instance SWE-bench Verified subset across four bases, base capability is the dominant, confound-free effect, and on two strong base models a deliberate no-op-composite control isolates the suite’s contribution at +5 and 

+4 (G PT 29 → 34 , 65% ; G LM 5.2 24 → 28 ), with the event logs verifying that its mechanisms fire and prevent regressions. Because these single-run evaluations are expensive, confirming run-to-run variance and adapting the per-task algorithm mix—then the distillation step that turns verified traces into weights—are the outstanding work. 

## References 

Mehdi Abbana Bennani, Thang Doan, and Masashi Sugiyama. Generalisation guarantees for continual learning with orthogonal gradient descent. In 4th Lifelong Machine Learning Workshop at ICML ,2020. arXiv:2006.11942. Dheeraj Baby and Yu-Xiang Wang. Optimal dynamic regret in proper online learning with strongly convex losses and beyond. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence and Statistics (AISTATS) , volume 151 of PMLR , pages 1805–1845, 2022. arXiv:2201.08905. Vivek S. Borkar. Stochastic Approximation: A Dynamical Systems Viewpoint . Cambridge University Press, 2008. Matthew Bowers, Theo X. Olausson, Lionel Wong, Gabriel Grand, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Kevin Ellis, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Top-down synthesis for library learning. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages , 7(POPL):41:1–41:32, 2023. arXiv:2211.16605. Bradley Brown, Jordan Juravsky, Ryan Ehrlich, Ronald Clark, Quoc V. Le, Christopher Ré, and Azalia Mirhoseini. Large language monkeys: Scaling inference compute with repeated sampling. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21787 , 2024. Yash Chandak, Scott M. Jordan, Georgios Theocharous, Martha White, and Philip S. Thomas. Towards safe policy improvement for non-stationary MDPs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. arXiv:2010.12645. 20 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Anh Nguyen, Daoguang Zan, Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen. CodeT: Code generation with generated tests. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. arXiv:2207.10397. Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language mod-els to self-debug. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. arXiv:2304.05128. Neil Chowdhury, James Aung, Chan Jun Shern, Oliver Jaffe, Dane Sherburn, Giulio Starace, Evan Mays, Rachel Dias, Marwan Aljubeh, Mia Glaese, Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Kevin Liu, and Aleksander Madry. Introducing SWE-bench Verified. OpenAI, 2024. URL https://openai. com/index/introducing-swe-bench-verified/ .Ben Chugg, Hongjian Wang, and Aaditya Ramdas. A unified recipe for deriving (time-uniform) PAC-Bayes bounds. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 24(372):1–61, 2023. arXiv:2302.03421. Antoine Cully and Yiannis Demiris. Quality and diversity optimization: A unifying modular framework. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , 22(2):245–259, 2018. Ashok Cutkosky. Parameter-free, dynamic, and strongly-adaptive online learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , volume 119 of PMLR , 2020. Kevin Ellis, Catherine Wong, Maxwell Nye, Mathias Sablé-Meyer, Lucas Morales, Luke Hewitt, Luc Cary, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. DreamCoder: Bootstrapping inductive program synthesis with wake-sleep library learning. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI) , 2021. arXiv:2006.08381. Mehrdad Farajtabar, Navid Azizan, Alex Mott, and Ang Li. Orthogonal gradient descent for continual learning. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) , volume 108 of PMLR , pages 3762–3773, 2020. arXiv:1910.07104. Lior Friedman and Ron Meir. Data-dependent and oracle bounds on forgetting in continual learning. In Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents (CoLLAs) , 2025. arXiv:2406.09370. Shi Fu, Yingjie Wang, Yuzhu Chen, Xinmei Tian, and Dacheng Tao. A theoretical perspective: How to prevent model collapse in self-consuming training loops. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. arXiv:2502.18865. Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In 

Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , volume 202 of 

PMLR , pages 10835–10866, 2023. arXiv:2210.10760. Matthias Gerstgrasser, Rylan Schaeffer, Apratim Dey, Rafael Rafailov, et al. Is model collapse inevitable? breaking the curse of recursion by accumulating real and synthetic data. In Conference on Language Modeling (COLM) , 2024. arXiv:2404.01413. Caglar Gulcehre, Tom Le Paine, Srivatsan Srinivasan, et al. Reinforced self-training (ReST) for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08998 , 2023. Anna Harutyunyan, Will Dabney, Thomas Mesnard, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Bilal Piot, Nicolas Heess, Hado van Hasselt, Greg Wayne, Satinder Singh, Doina Precup, and Rémi Munos. Hindsight credit assignment. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2019. Steven R. Howard, Aaditya Ramdas, Jon McAuliffe, and Jasjeet Sekhon. Time-uniform, nonparamet-ric, nonasymptotic confidence sequences. The Annals of Statistics , 49(2):1055–1080, 2021. Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2022. arXiv:2106.09685. Carlos E. Jiménez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world GitHub issues? In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. arXiv:2310.06770. 21 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt tuning. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2021. arXiv:2104.08691. Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. In 

Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) ,2021. arXiv:2101.00190. Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. Debmalya Mandal, Stelios Triantafyllou, and Goran Radanovic. Performative reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , volume 202 of 

PMLR , pages 23642–23680, 2023. Alexander Meulemans, Simon Schug, Seijin Kobayashi, Nathaniel Daw, and Greg Wayne. Would I have gotten that reward? long-term credit assignment by counterfactual contribution analysis. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.04909 , 2015. Francesco Orabona and Dávid Pál. Coin betting and parameter-free online learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2016. Anastasia Pentina and Christoph H. Lampert. A PAC-Bayesian bound for lifelong learning. In 

Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , volume 32 of 

PMLR , pages 991–999, 2014. Juan C. Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. Performative prediction. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , volume 119 of 

PMLR , pages 7599–7609, 2020. arXiv:2002.06673. Aaditya Ramdas, Peter Grünwald, Vladimir Vovk, and Glenn Shafer. Game-theoretic statistics and safe anytime-valid inference. Statistical Science , 38(4):576–601, 2023. arXiv:2210.01948. Jürgen Schmidhuber. Gödel machines: Self-referential universal problem solvers making provably optimal self-improvements. arXiv preprint cs/0309048 , 2003. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Nicolas Papernot, Ross Anderson, and Yarin Gal. AI models collapse when trained on recursively generated data. Nature , 631(8022):755–759, 2024. Philip S. Thomas, Georgios Theocharous, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. High confidence policy improvement. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) ,volume 37 of PMLR , pages 2380–2388, 2015. Philip S. Thomas, Bruno Castro da Silva, Andrew G. Barto, Stephen Giguere, Yuriy Brun, and Emma Brunskill. Preventing undesirable behavior of intelligent machines. Science , 366(6468):999–1004, 2019. Daniil Tiapkin, Daniele Calandriello, Denis Belomestny, Eric Moulines, Alexey Naumov, Kashif Rasul, Michal Valko, and Pierre Ménard. Proximal point nash learning from human feedback. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19731 , 2025. v1 titled “Accelerating Nash Learning from Human Feedback via Mirror Prox (Nash-MP)”. Jean Ville. Étude critique de la notion de collectif. Gauthier-Villars, Paris , 1939. Mingzhi Wang, Chengdong Ma, Qizhi Chen, Linjian Meng, Yang Han, Jiancong Xiao, Zhaowei Zhang, Jing Huo, Weijie J. Su, and Yaodong Yang. Magnetic preference optimization: Achieving last-iterate convergence for language model alignment. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. arXiv:2410.16714. 22 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

Algorithm 1 PPB-CL: forgetting-gated, trust-regioned continual adapter learning 

1: init frozen prior Q0 = N (θ0, diag ev ); update-direction buffer B ← ∅ (FIFO, cap m); anchors 

A ← ∅ (cap A, each task with best historical reward) 

2: for t = 1 , 2, . . . do 

3: rollouts ← DEPLOY (πt−1, n t tasks ); record rewards Ri, directive indices ai ▷St ∼ D (πt−1)

4: ˆg ← 1

> nt

P

> i

 ℓi − ¯ℓpool 

 ∇θ log pθ (ai), ℓi = 1 − Ri ▷ baseline pooled over the recent replay window 

5: ˆg⊥ ← ˆg − P 

> J∈B
> ⟨ˆg,J ⟩⟨J,J ⟩

J ▷ OGD projection off stored directions 

6: θcand ← θt−1 − η ˆg⊥; Bfgt ← DVB OUND (θcand , t ) ▷ Eq. (3) 

7: d ← 0

8: while Bfgt > τ forget and d < 5 do ▷ damped re-test 

9: θcand ← θt−1 + ρ (θcand − θt−1); Bfgt ← DVB OUND (θcand , t ); d ← d + 1 

10: end while 

11: r ← max( τforget − Bfgt , 0) /ε ▷ performative trust region 

12: if ∥θcand − θt−1∥2 > r then 

13: θcand ← ΠB(θt−1,r )(θcand ); recompute Bfgt and r

14: end if 

15: if Bfgt ≤ τforget and εL < 1 then ▷ ACCEPT 

16: θt ← θcand ; B ← (B ∪ { ˆg⊥})[ −m:] ; update A with this round’s tasks/best rewards 

17: else θt ← θt−1 ▷ HOLD 

18: end if 

19: emit certificate (t, B fgt , r, KL( Qθt ∥Q0), PAC-Bayes penalty , d )

20: end for 

21: function DVB OUND (θ, t) ▷ anytime-valid backward transfer, Eq. (3) 

22: deploy π(θ) on anchor tasks; bbt ← 1

> |A|

P

> j

(1 − Rj ) − (1 − R∗ 

> j

)

23: return bbt + At/λ ∗ + λ∗/(8 |A| ) ▷ A t = KL + log(2 √t/δ ); λ∗ = p8|A| At, the DV-optimal temperature 

24: end function 

Xuening Wu, Shenqin Yin, Yanlan Kang, Xinhang Zhang, Qianya Xu, Zeping Chen, and Wenqiang Zhang. SGM: A statistical Gödel machine for risk-controlled recursive self-modification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10232 , 2025. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah D. Goodman. STaR: Bootstrapping reason-ing with reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. arXiv:2203.14465. 

## A Algorithm Pseudocode 

This appendix collects the pseudocode for every algorithm in Table 1; each box is referenced from the main text. 

## B The Full Self-Evolution Loop: How A LG 6–A LG 10 Plug In 

Figure 1 shows the four layers and the five scheduled controllers (A LG 1–A LG 5), which can only 

select among behaviors the frozen base already produces. Figure 4 extends it with the verifier-tier mechanisms A LG 6–A LG 10 (Table 1) that generate and verify those behaviors, supplying the variation and the dense, grader-free signal the controllers consume. The framework is one closed loop over three stages. (1) Policy. The deployed policy πt = L0 ◦ L(t)1 ◦ L(t)2 is rolled out. (2) Engine 

23 

2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved Algorithm 2 PNMP-A: two-timescale anchored preference learning with an e-value drift gate 

1: init q ← 0; frozen anchor qreal ; magnet z ← θ0; reference log πref ← log softmax( θ0); CTHS budget( δ0); rates aslow  

> t

= 12 (t+1) −1, afast  

> t

= 12 (t+1) −0.7

2: for t = 1 , 2, . . . do 

3: rollouts ← DEPLOY (πt−1); pairs ← {(i, j, winner ) : winner has higher mean reward over the recent replay window} 

4: if not budget.exhausted then ▷ SLOW : anchored preference update 

5: gsynth ← ∇ q bLBT (q; pairs ); qcand ← q + aslow 

> t

α (qreal − q) + (1 − α) gsynth 



6: X ←  |σ(qcand  

> i

−qcand  

> j

) − σ(qreal  

> i

−qreal  

> j

)| i<j ▷ per-pair drift vs. frozen anchor 

7: E ← EP ROCESS (X; H0 : E[X] ≤ τ )

8: k ← k + 1 ; δk ← δ0/ Z k log 2(k+1)  ▷ normalized CTHS spend 

9: if E ≥ 1/δ k then reject: keep q ▷ anytime-valid evidence of unsafe drift 

10: else q ← qcand ▷ ACCEPT 

11: end if 

12: end if 

13: adv i(p) ← P 

> j

pj σ(qi − qj ); prox( g) ← softmax   log pt−1+ηg +β log πref 

> 1+ β

 ▷ FAST 

14: θ1/2 ← log prox  adv(softmax( θt−1)) ; θMP ← log prox  adv(softmax( θ1/2)) 

15: θt ← θt−1 + afast  

> t

(θMP − θt−1) ▷ extragradient step 

16: if t mod K = 0 then z ← θt ▷ magnet refresh 

17: end if 

18: emit certificate (t, ACCEPT /HOLD , δ k, E, KL( πt∥z), pref. drift )

19: end for Algorithm 3 PA-COCOA: counterfactual credit assignment driving a coin-betting oracle 

1: init oracle O ← per-coordinate KT coin betting (dim k); θ0 ← O .PREDICT () ; reward stream 

V ← [ ] ; VT ← 0

2: for t = 1 , 2, . . . do 

3: rollouts ← DEPLOY (πt) ▷ actor samples directive a ∼ softmax( θt) per task 

4: append masked mean process reward to V (environment-errored rollouts zeroed); extend replay buffer ▷ augmented outcome: rollouts carry (a, π t)

5: for each directive a ∈ { 1..k } do ▷ contribution model, off-policy on replay 

6: bw(a) ←

P   

> r∈recent(4 h): ar=a

ωr 2−age( r)/h ˜Rr

P   

> r:ar=a

ωr 2−age( r)/h (default 12 if no data) ▷ ˜R: process reward, Eq. (10) ; ωr folds in the env-error mask and repo-family weight, and rejected-candidate rollouts are skipped 

7: end for 

8: p ← softmax( θt); g ← ( bw ⊙ p) − p ⟨ bw, p ⟩ + φ (1/k − p) ▷ Eq. (6) + exploration floor; no importance ratio 

9: drift ← WILD BOOTSTRAP TREND (V ; α=0 .01) if |V | ≥ 12 else false 

10: if drift then O.RESTART () ▷ anchor a new comparator segment 

11: θt+1 ← O .UPDATE (−g) ▷ oracle minimizes loss; feed −g

12: VT ← VT + ∥θt+1 − θt∥2

13: emit certificate (t, ∥g∥, ∥θt+1 − θt∥, V T , #restarts , max a bw − min a bw)

14: end for (A LG 6–A LG 10). An actor-and-search engine manufactures diverse candidate patches and scores them against a self-authored verifier: best-of-N /refinement varies attempts (A LG 6), micro-step search relocates the search to one-line edits where even a weak base is reliable (A LG 7), self-authored reproduction oracles supply the in-loop reward Vself without touching the held-out grader (A LG 8), the search-layer controllers govern that search (A LG 9), and verified self-repair fixes the harness’s own edit/compose operators (A LG 10). (3) Controllers (A LG 1–A LG 5). The verified rollouts and process rewards the engine emits feed the L3 controllers, which gate every self-modification, write the certificate ledger, and update πt for the next round. The held-out grader sits outside the loop: it measures the finalized patch once and never steers the search. The division of labor is the figure’s 24 

2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved Algorithm 4 SGM-CS: self-edit admission with anytime familywise risk control  

> 1:

init deployed policy π0; confirmation count k ← 0; CTHS budget( δ0); per-version CS map  

> 2:

for t = 1 , 2, . . . do  

> 3:

if budget.exhausted then emit HOLD ; continue ▷ harness frozen  

> 4:

πcand ← pop a requeued promising same-family harness (its repo among the round’s), else PROPOSE EDIT (πt−1, t ) ▷ shadow requeue / force-edit / budget / guidance  

> 5:

if version( πcand ) = version( πt−1) then emit HOLD ; continue ▷ no-op edit; no spend  

> 6:

tasks ← rank batch by weak recent evidence (unseen / low-reward first); move the best-evidenced task to the front as pilot ▷ higher-signal, index-aligned pairing  

> 7:

pre-gate: run πcand on the pilot; if best pilot reward < PREGATE MIN and pilot task is known passable then spend δk (k++ ); requeue a promoted shadow; emit NSF ; continue ▷

evidence-gated; cold start falls through  

> 8:

deploy πt−1 and πcand concurrently on the same task batch (isolated working copies; common random numbers—aligned per-task seeds)  

> 9:

if no learnable pairing survives (e.g. every rollout env-errored) then emit HOLD ; continue ▷

no spend  

> 10:

k ← k + 1 ; δk ← δ0/ Z k log 2(k + 1)  ▷ normalized CTHS spend, committed on decision  

> 11:

update per-version CSs [Howard et al., 2021] with Rbase , Rcand  

> 12:

LCB ← CS lower 

> δk

 Rcand − Rbase 

 − ε · W1(Rcand , R base ) ▷ performative correction, exact 1-D W1 

> 13:

if wild-bootstrap trend test rejects stationarity of the vbase stream from baseline-evaluated rounds then  

> 14:

LCB ← LCB − radius ▷ widen; Chandak et al. [2020]  

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

if LCB ≥ − ϵtol then  

> 17:

πt ← πcand ▷ ACCEPT  

> 18:

else πt ← πt−1; if πcand produced a strong patch then requeue it (bounded retries per harness) ▷ NSF , but retry a promising harness later  

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

emit certificate (t, ACCEPT /NSF , LCB , δ k, εW 1, widened? , shadow ) 

> 21:

end for 

point—A LG 6–A LG 10 create and verify variation; A LG 1–A LG 5 gate and select among it; A LG 9is itself A LG 1/A LG 3/A LG 4/A LG 5 re-aimed onto the search layer (Table 2). 

## C Certificate Schema 

Each round of every controller emits an immutable, structured certificate with fields: algorithm ,

round , decision ∈ { ACCEPT , HOLD , REJECT , NSF }, delta_spent (this round’s error spend), 

cumulative_delta , a metrics map, and a free-text note. Controller-specific metrics include: A LG 1empirical risk, KL to prior, PAC-Bayes penalty and risk bound, forgetting bound, trust radius, gradient norm, damping count, εL ; A LG 2 mean reward, e-value, KL to magnet, slow/fast rates, preference drift; A LG 3 gradient and step norms, path variation, restarts, contribution spread; A LG 4 corrected LCB, per-version value bounds, performative shift, widening flag, baseline-evaluated flag (so the stationarity stream can exclude rounds without a fresh baseline value); A LG 5 solved count, library size, ∆J (the SWE variant reports it only when the macro committed, alongside a committed-macro flag; the generic controller reports it unconditionally), archive coverage, frontier size, description-length bound. The composite controller merges sub-certificates with per-algorithm metric prefixes into one ledger row per round. The search-layer controllers emit a finer-grained, per-decision audit log: an opt-in, decision-neutral JSONL sink writes one flushed row per controller decision (the marginal gain and confidence interval for A LG 4, the collapsed behavior cells for A LG 5, the per-branch verified reward for A LG 3, the measured forgetting for A LG 1), so a crashed or killed run still leaves a complete, inspectable trail. This per-decision trail is what attributes each flip and regression to a named mechanism in §9. 25 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

Algorithm 5 SDC-QD: library growth with MDL compression and quality-diversity acceptance  

> 1:

init corpus C ← ∅ ; MAP-Elites archive M over descriptor ϕ; library L ← L0; solve threshold 

s∗ 

> 2:

for t = 1 , 2, . . . do  

> 3:

for each task in batch do ▷ WAKE : LLM-guided program search  

> 4:

ρ ← PARSE SE XPR 

 LLM( task , L t) ▷ untrusted output; None if not well-formed  

> 5:

if ρ̸ = None and env .score( ρ) ≥ s∗ then C ← C ∪ { ρ} 

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

Jbefore ← | Lt| + P 

> ρ∈C

|ρ| 

> 8:

cands ← subtrees (C) ∪ pairwise antiunifications of compatible subtrees ▷ SLEEP : Stitch  

> 9:

A∗ ← arg max A∈cands u(A), u(A) = mA (bA − 1 − aA) − bA ▷ descending scan, sound dominance break  

> 10:

if A∗̸ = None and ∆J := u(A∗) ≥ umin then ▷ quality-diversity acceptance, minimum-utility bar  

> 11:

b ← ϕ(Lt ∪ { A∗}) = ( |Lt|+1 , mean ρ∈C |ρ| ); f ← Jbefore − ∆J ▷ lower fitness is better  

> 12:

if M.ISNOVEL (b, f ) then ▷ empty cell or improves incumbent  

> 13:

M.ADD (Lt ∪ { A∗}, b, f ); Lt+1 ← Lt ∪ { A∗}; surface A∗ in harness L2 ▷ 

> ACCEPT
> 14:

else Lt+1 ← Lt ▷ REJECT : no novelty  

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

else Lt+1 ← Lt ▷ REJECT : no MDL gain  

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

cert ← description-length certificate, Eq. (8)  

> 19:

emit certificate (t, #solved , |Lt+1 |, ∆J, M.coverage , |M .ParetoFrontier() |, cert ) 

> 20:

end for Algorithm 6 (A LG 6) Verifier-in-the-loop search: best-of-N selection and refinement with backtrack-ing  

> 1:

function BEST OFN( π, task x; n) ▷ independent diverse attempts; verifier selects  

> 2:

for i = 0 , . . . , n − 1 do yi ← ACT (π, x, attempt= i) ▷ attempt-indexed seed + isolated workspace; live: n=2 , attempt 2 only on a failing verdict, prompted to differ structurally  

> 3:

end for  

> 4:

return yi∗ , i∗ = arg max i V (x, y i) ▷ V : shaped native-test verifier; p → 1 − (1 − p)n 

> 5:

end function  

> 6:

function REFINE (π, task x; depth d) ▷ verifier-guided hill-climb over patches  

> 7:

y∗ ← ACT (π, x, attempt=0) ; v∗ ← V (x, y ∗) 

> 8:

for i = 1 , . . . , d − 1 do  

> 9:

if v∗ ≥ 1 then break ▷ resolved; stop early  

> 10:

x′ ← x ⊕  y∗, FEEDBACK (x, y ∗) ▷ prior best patch + why the verifier rejected it  

> 11:

y ← ACT (π, x ′, attempt= i); v ← V (x, y ) ▷ scored on the original task  

> 12:

if v > v ∗ then (y∗, v ∗) ← (y, v ) ▷ climb; else backtrack (keep best)  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

return y∗ 

> 15:

end function 

## D Default Hyperparameters 

Defaults in the reference implementation: A LG 1: δ = 0 .05 , τforget = 0 .1 (raised to 1.1 above the anytime floor for live multi-step SWE runs), ε = 0 .2, L = 1 , buffer capacity m = 16 , damping 

ρ = 0 .5, λ set per evaluation to the DV-optimal λ∗ = p8|A| At (λ = 4 fallback for At ≤ 0), REINFORCE baseline pooled over a replay window of 8× batch size, learning rate η = 0 .5, anchor capacity A = 4 . A LG 2: α = 0 .3, β = 0 .1, η = 0 .5, τ = 0 .1, δ0 = 0 .05 , magnet period K = 5 ,slow/fast step exponents 1.0/0.7 with a0 = 0 .5, preference pairs pooled over the recent replay window. A LG 3: contribution half-life h = 64 over a window of 4h recent rollouts, drift test from 12 

26 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

Algorithm 7 (A LG 7) Verified micro-step search (fast loop): beam search with memory and a verifier cascade  

> 1:

init beam ← { seed patch }; memory M ← ∅ ; best ← seed; depth ← 0 

> 2:

while depth < MAX DEPTH and V (best ) < 1 do  

> 3:

children ← [ ]  

> 4:

for node in beam do  

> 5:

H ← GENERATE (node , M, k ) ▷ reasoning-first: name class/method, then k distinct one-line edits; capped prompt (issue ≤1.8k chars, JSON-array reply)  

> 6:

for h ∈ H with h / ∈ M .tried do  

> 7:

ρ ← COMPOSE (node.patch , h ); if ρ = ⊥ then M.tried += h; continue ▷ did not apply  

> 8:

(v, fb ) ← CASCADE (ρ) ▷ cheap parse/apply check, then native suite only on survivors  

> 9:

M.RECORD (h, v, fb ); children.append (ρ, v ); if v ≥ 1 then break  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

depth ← depth +1 ; if children = ∅ then break ▷ a whole diverse round moved nothing  

> 13:

beam ← top-b of (beam ∪ children) by V ; best ← arg max V over all scored candidates ▷

parents kept; best tracked globally, independent of beam policy  

> 14:

end while  

> 15:

return best, its verified trace, and # expensive verifier calls 

Algorithm 8 (A LG 8) Self-authored reproduction oracles: grader-free in-loop verification  

> 1:

given issue text (no gold tests, no test patch, no f2p/p2p lists); a verifier model; a solver agent  

> 2:

O ← SYNTHESIZE (issue , k ) over an ensemble of models ▷ any model may author a usable oracle (recall)  

> 3:

A ← { o ∈ O : RUN ONBASE (o) fails, not a timeout, not a syntactic self-error } ▷ fails-on-base admission—no ground truth  

> 4:

A ← { o ∈ A : SYMPTOM JUDGE (o) matches the issue } ▷ denoise; separates real import bugs from hallucinated APIs  

> 5:

the agent debugs with run_tests =self-score over A: ▷ the in-loop gradient is A, never the grader 

Vself (ρ) = #{o ∈ A : ρ flips o fail → pass }|A| , set to 0 if any green check regresses; promising 

iff all flip  

> 6:

ρ⋆ ← the agent’s submitted patch  

> 7:

measure once (terminal, held out from the loop): held-out grader on ρ⋆ ▷ used only to report, never to steer observations at level 0.01 , exploration floor φ = 0 .05 . A LG 4: δ0 = 0 .05 , ϵtol = 0 .02 , ε = 0 .1, CS 

α = 0 .05 with σ = 0 .5 (Hoeffding scale for [0 , 1] rewards); SWE proposer cycle: force-edit threshold decrements of 2 down to a floor of 3 (initialized at half the step budget), step-budget increments of 

6 capped at 36 , guidance rewrites under 60 words; pre-gate pilot of 1 task with minimum reward 

0.05 (disabled on the first round, when no evidence exists), shadow threshold 1.0 with retry cap of 2

per harness; the paired-difference CS runs at scale σ = 1 .0. A LG 5: δ = 0 .05 , solve threshold 1.0,minimum utility 1.0; SWE macro-reward bar equal to the corpus bar, downstream lift measured once the contextual pool holds ≥ 4 rewards; generic archive 16 × 16 over (library size, mean program size) in [0 , 32] 2; SWE archive 8 × 16 over (arity, pattern size) in [0 , 8] × [0 , 16] , operation windows of length 2–3, corpus bar 0.4 on the process reward, minimum downstream lift 0.05 (strictly required; path-literal and single-op macros refused), library capped at 3 entries per (repository, status) context and 12 total, retirement over a 24 -rollout window at bad-rate 0.5. Verifier mechanisms: best-of-N

default n = 4 , refinement depth 3 (best-of-N /A LG 6 is removed from the live composite, §9.1; refinement depth 1 so verify-react stays active; unverified-green cap 0.9; tie-break judge at score 

≥ 0.85 with zero admitted oracles; micro-search issue cap 1.8k characters; fuzzy-edit hint threshold 

0.6); run_tests feedback carries the last 1400 characters of the failure log. Composite default periods: A LG 1/A LG 3 every round, A LG 4/A LG 5 every 2, A LG 2 every 3; cost-aware skip after 2

gainless scheduled rounds. 27 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

Algorithm 9 (A LG 9) Efficient continual search: search-layer controllers (compute-allocation + QD diversity; step-credit + forgetting gate)  

> 1:

init step-credit C (A LG 3); forgetting gate G (A LG 1); earlier-repo anchor A 

> 2:

for each round over the problem stream do  

> 3:

for each problem x do  

> 4:

order branch classes for x by learned credit C ▷ ALG 3: productive step macros first  

> 5:

BEAM SEARCH (x) with two controllers active: ▷ Algorithm 7  

> 6:

ALG 4 budget : record per-depth marginal gain; stop when the CS upper bound ≤

> MIN

GAIN  

> 7:

ALG 5 diversify : pick the next beam by MAP-Elites behavior cells, not raw top-b score  

> 8:

credit the solving branch 1, the branches tried before it 0 ▷ ALG 3 update; wasted shapes demoted  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

propose policy update; accept iff G: re-eval of anchor A does not regress ▷ ALG 1 forgetting gate  

> 11:

record (mean depth, resolved-rate, forgetting) for the round  

> 12:

end for Algorithm 10 (A LG 10) Verified self-repair: adopt a harness repair only by measured fix-rate  

> 1:

function PROPOSE REPAIRS (failures F (base, hypothesis pairs that did not apply); repertoire R;threshold τ ) 

> 2:

adopted ← [ ]  

> 3:

for each primitive r ∈ R do  

> 4:

fixed ← {(b, h ) ∈ F : r(h)̸ = h ∧ COMPOSES (b, r (h)) } ▷ re-test against the real 

composer  

> 5:

if fixed /|F | ≥ τ then adopted.append  r, fixed /|F | ▷ credited only if it changed h and applied  

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

return adopted sorted by fix-rate, best-first ▷ appended to the harness repair pipeline ( L2) 

> 8:

end function  

> 9:

function PROPOSE GENERATION REPAIR (suffix repertoire G; baseline apply-rate ρ0; margin m) 

> 10:

for each suffix g ∈ G do  

> 11:

ρ ← REGEN APPLY RATE (g) ▷ re-generate hypotheses with g appended; fraction that compose  

> 12:

if ρ − ρ0 ≥ m then adopt g ▷ verified at the source: fixes future candidates  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

end function 

## E The SWE Agent Tool Protocol 

The agent replies with exactly one structured action per turn, drawn from the vocabulary 

list (d) search (r) read (f, i :j) edit (f, old → new ) run_tests () 

submit () 

over directories d, regular expressions r, files f , line ranges i:j, and exact text replacements. Edits require the search text to match exactly once; a miss falls back to a unique whitespace-normalized fuzzy match, and a true miss returns the nearest similar line as a hint (ambiguous matches are refused). Search is regular-expression matching with capped output (at most 60 matches); read windows report the file’s true line total; observations are truncated to a fixed character budget; malformed replies receive a corrective error message and consume a step. run_tests is advertised only when a test runner is configured; it applies the current edits, runs the instance’s target tests, and returns pass counts plus the tail of the failure log (“submit now” on a full resolve). When a test runner is available, submit is blocked until run_tests has been run on the latest edits, so the agent cannot submit blind; and an episode that would otherwise end with an empty diff triggers a final no-patch recovery pass (up to two forced-edit attempts at temperature 0). When the explore →edit 28 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

Algorithm 11 Composite controller: scheduled co-evolution over one shared policy  

> 1:

init shared policy π; schedule {(name i, Ci, K i)} ▷ K i = 0 disables Ci (ablation)  

> 2:

for t = 1 , 2, . . . do  

> 3:

ran ← [ ]  

> 4:

for each (name i, Ci, K i) with Ki > 0 and t mod Ki = 0 do ▷ in schedule order  

> 5:

if cost-aware and Ci is a slow L2 controller with no committed gain for the last SKIP AFTER 

rounds then skip ( HOLD , reclaim its deploys); set its counter to SKIP AFTER − 1 (probe next round); continue  

> 6:

Ci.π ← π; ci ← C i.STEP (t); π ← C i.π ▷ propagate this layer’s edit  

> 7:

update Ci’s no-gain counter from ci (reset on committed gain: accept / shadow-accept / committed macro / anti-macros); ran.append  (name i, c i) 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

emit merged certificate: metrics prefixed name i.∗; spends summed; decision ← first of ( ACCEPT , NSF , REJECT ) present among {ci}, else HOLD  

> 10:

end for 

budget binds, search /read /list return a corrective message until an edit lands. The final patch is the accumulated edit set, scored by the native evaluator. 29 

> 2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved

L0 — frozen base model 

L1 — steering adapter θ (online-steered) 

L2 — harness: prompt · tools · budgets · library · repair 

deployed policy 

πt = L0 ◦ L(t)1 ◦ L(t)2

actor — multi-step R EACT agent over the struc-tured tool vocabulary (§7) 

ALG 6 best-of-N / refinement — designed opera-tor; off in the live stack 

ALG 7 verified micro-step search — beam over one-line edits where the base is reliable 

ALG 8 self-authored oracles ⇒ Vself — dense, grader-free in-loop reward 

ALG 9 search-layer controllers — compute-stop ·

QD diversify · step-credit · forgetting gate 

ALG 10 verified self-repair — adopts edit/compose fixes by measured fix-rate ( → L2)

actor & verified-search engine (A LG 6–A LG 10) 

generates & verifies candidate behaviors 

ALG 4 SGM-CS — gated harness edits ( L2)

ALG 5 SDC-QD — grows the abstraction li-brary ( L2)

ALG 3 PA-COCOA — counterfactual credit 

→ θ (L1)

ALG 1 PPB-CL — forgetting gate + trust re-gion ( L1)

ALG 2 PNMP-A — anchors the reward model 

q

L3 scheduled controllers (A LG 1–A LG 5) 

gate & select self-modifications 

environment + held-out grader 

terminal measurement only — never steers the search 

reward model q certificate ledger 

> ACCEPT

/HOLD /NSF · δ-spend 

deploy πt / act 

verified rollouts 

+ process reward ˜R

finalized patch 

e-value drift gate 

q scores rollouts 

gated self-modifications ⇒ πt+1 

ALG 3/A LG 1→ L1 ALG 4/A LG 5→ L2 ALG 2→ q

Figure 4: The full self-evolution loop (extends Figure 1). The five scheduled controllers of Figure 1 (right, A LG 1–A LG 5) can only select among behaviors the frozen policy stack (left, πt) already produces. The verifier-tier mechanisms A LG 6–A LG 10 (centre, green dashed) are the engine that supplies them: the actor and its search operators (A LG 6/A LG 7) manufacture diverse candidate patches; self-authored reproduction oracles (A LG 8) score each candidate with a dense, grader-free reward Vself ; the search-layer controllers (A LG 9, = ALG 1/ALG 3/ALG 4/ALG 5 re-aimed) govern the search; and verified self-repair (A LG 10) fixes the harness’s own edit operators. The engine emits verified rollouts and process rewards ˜R that feed the L3 controllers, which gate each self-modification, write the certificate ledger, and close the loop by updating πt (A LG 3/A LG 1 on 

L1, A LG 4/A LG 5 on L2, A LG 2 on the reward model q). The held-out grader sits outside the loop, measuring the finalized patch once and never steering it. 30 

2026 JP Morgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved