Title: Self-Modifying Lean Proof Agents with Verifier-Grounded Benchmark Coevolution

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.17352v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 01:14:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Self-Modifying Lean Proof Agents with Verifier-Grounded Benchmark Coevolution 

Yuqing Li University of Pittsburgh 

yul658@pitt.edu 

Zeguan Wu University of Pittsburgh 

zew79@pitt.edu 

Yu Gan University of Pittsburgh 

yug130@pitt.edu 

Junyu Liu ∗

University of Pittsburgh 

junyuliucaltech@gmail.com 

Abstract 

Designing effective Lean proof agents is a central challenge in formal mathematical reasoning. While one line of work builds stronger Lean-oriented provers, recent perspectives emphasize that theorem-proving agents also need better workflows around Lean: how they decompose proof obli-gations, use tools and compiler feedback, diagnose failed attempts, repair proofs, and maintain structured proof context. Motivated by code-level self-evolving agents, we study whether such workflows can be evolved rather than hand-designed. We present a self-evolving Lean proof agent in which a small fixed, trusted runtime wraps a fully mutable workspace — the proof workflow, prompts, and tools. Unlike most self-evolving agent systems, which optimize against an exter-nally supplied, fixed benchmark, our system coevolves the agent and its benchmark. Between generations, the highest-scoring agent — the champion — revises the active task distribution through a mastery-throttled curriculum update, introducing harder proof obligations only after the current level has been mastered; a single-anchor recalibration then re-runs the champion on the updated benchmark so that scores remain comparable as difficulty rises. All evolution stays inside a Lean-grounded verification loop: however the agent rewrites itself, a success counts only when its behavior yields Lean-verified proofs under a trusted snapshot. Each solve attempt must also emit a machine-readable, Lean-grounded proof context whose representation is free to evolve but whose groundedness is enforced. We run both the coevolving trajectory and a fixed-benchmark baseline for 15 active generations. Because coevolving raw scores are measured under changing benchmark difficulty, we compare runs on a held-out miniF2F test split, evalu-ating selected agents from the coevolving trajectory and the two highest-scoring agents from the fixed-benchmark baseline. On this split, the best evaluated coevolving agent reaches a 45 .1% 

held-out solve rate, compared with 12 .7% for the seed and 32 .0% for the best fixed-benchmark baseline agent. These results show that verifier-grounded self-evolution can improve Lean proof workflows under a coevolving benchmark. 

# 1 Introduction 

Lean proof agents and the workflow bottleneck. Designing effective agentic frameworks for Lean-based theorem proving has become an increasingly central problem in formal mathematical reasoning [12, 20, 16, 15, 5]. One line of work aims to build stronger Lean-oriented provers: special-ized models, tactics, or search procedures that more directly synthesize valid Lean proofs [12, 20, 16]. 

> ∗

Corresponding author. 

1arXiv:2607.17352v1 [cs.AI] 19 Jul 2026 seed      

> agent
> G1
> agent
> G1
> agent Champion agent
> Current
> Bechmark
> easy tasks
> hard tasks
> Updated
> Benchmark
> G2
> agent
> tasks
> single-tactic lemma s
> tasks
> miniF2F
> tasks
> PutnamBench
> Total Task Pool
> When Champion agent's accuracy :
> replace an task with
> an task if accuracy
> Difficulty normalization
> Benchmark update rule
> an task if accuracy
> Evaluation
> Records
> Records from
> all agents
> G1 agent
> records
> G1 agent
> records
> Champion
> agent
> records
> G2
> agent
> G2
> agent

Figure 1: Champion-driven agent–benchmark coevolution. A seed agent produces first-generation ( G1 ) children that stream into a shared archive as they are evaluated, so a strong early child can already parent later siblings in the same generation; the strongest child becomes the champion , seeds the next generation ( G2 ), and also drives the benchmark update. Evaluation records from all agents are collected. The benchmark is drawn from a candidate problem pool stratified by difficulty level ( L1: single-tactic lemmas; L2: miniF2F valid split, disjoint from the held-out test set used only for generalization; L3: PutnamBench). When the champion clears the update threshold, mastered tasks are retired and replaced either laterally by new tasks from the same level, or by harder tasks from the next level once that level has been mastered. The updated benchmark is then used to evaluate the next generation. To keep scores comparable as the benchmark becomes harder, the champion is re-run on the updated benchmark as a single-anchor recalibration: equating its normalized scores, e.g. 0.39 × 1 = 0 .32 × c, yields the new difficulty coefficient c = 1 .24 (illustrative values). A complementary, workflow-centered line — exemplified by LEAP [15] and Goedel-Architect [5] — instead emphasizes that the bottleneck is not only prover strength, but also how an agent interacts with the Lean proof environment: how it decomposes proof obligations, invokes tools, uses compiler feedback, diagnoses failed attempts, repairs proofs, and maintains useful proof context. Both rely on hand-designed proof workflows built around intermediate Lean lemmas or AND/OR-style de-composition, and report strong results (Goedel-Architect reaches 99 .2% on miniF2F-test), showing that the proof workflow itself is a major determinant of performance. This work follows the workflow-centered view. We do not aim to make Lean itself a stronger verifier. Instead, Lean serves as a fixed, trusted substrate for checking correctness, while the object of improvement is the agentic proof workflow around it. Our motivating question is therefore: if a Lean proof agent is not given a carefully hand-designed workflow, what proof workflow can it evolve for itself? 2From DGM to Hyperagents. We approach this question through recent work on code-level self-evolving agents. The Darwin Gödel Machine (DGM) [35] showed that an agent can improve by rewriting its own code and empirically validating the resulting variants on downstream tasks. This makes DGM a natural starting point for self-improvement, but its original setting is closely aligned with coding: the agent modifies code, and its improvement is measured on coding benchmarks. Hyperagents [36] extend this line by introducing a self-referential architecture that integrates two roles into a single editable program: a task agent , which solves the target task, and a meta agent , which modifies both itself and the task agent. Because the meta-level modification procedure is itself editable, the system can improve not only task-solving behavior but also the mechanism that generates future improvements. This distinction matters for formal mathematics: it allows a self-evolving framework to target Lean theorem proving, where the object of improvement is the mathematical proof workflow itself rather than the agent’s general coding ability. 

From self-evolving agents to coevolving benchmarks. Although coevolving environments have been studied in open-ended systems such as POET and MCC [29, 2], many recent self-evolving agent systems still evolve the agent while keeping the external environment fixed [35, 36, 4, 32, 10, 37]. This is especially problematic for Lean theorem proving, where benchmark difficulty deter-mines whether evolution receives an informative selection signal. In our experiments, the seed proof agent solves only 12 .7% of the held-out miniF2F test split overall, and solves almost none of its competition-level (AMC/AIME/IMO) problems. Evolving directly against benchmarks of this difficulty means most evaluations end in failure and provide little selection signal. Conversely, a benchmark easy enough to be informative quickly saturates if it never hardens. We therefore use a coevolving benchmark , illustrated in Figure 1. To make benchmark replace-ment auditable, we organize the candidate problem pool into three difficulty levels. Although our longer-term goal is to let agents propose increasingly difficult formal problems themselves, this study takes a bounded first step: the champion updates the active benchmark under fixed rules, retiring mastered problems and replacing them either with new problems from the same level or, once that level has been mastered, with problems from a harder level. The benchmark can therefore begin in a tractable regime that provides an effective evolutionary signal while avoiding the saturation of a fixed easy benchmark. As the agent’s proof ability improves, the benchmark self-hardens, so the proof environment evolves together with the agent rather than remaining a fixed yardstick. 

Why Lean keeps the evolution grounded. The formal setting is essential: a self-rewriting proof agent cannot be trusted to report its own mathematical success; Lean, rather than the agent, is therefore the arbiter. A proof obligation counts as solved only when the generated proof re-verifies under a trusted Lean snapshot, and benchmark updates are driven by these Lean-verified records rather than by self-reports. We additionally require each attempt to emit an inspectable, Lean-grounded proof context whose representation is free to evolve but whose groundedness is enforced. We detail this representation-free-but-grounded contract, and the re-verification that makes solves hard to spoof under the trusted-runtime threat model, in Section 3.2. 

Contributions. 

• Self-evolving Lean proof agent. We present a code-level self-evolving Lean theorem-proving agent in which the proof workflow and tools are mutable, while proof success remains grounded in Lean verification. 3• Benchmark coevolution. We introduce a champion-driven, self-hardening benchmark that coevolves with the proof agent, using mastery-throttled updates and single-anchor recalibra-tion to raise difficulty while keeping scores comparable across generations. 

• Representation-free proof contexts grounded by Lean. We require each solve attempt to expose a machine-readable proof context whose representation may evolve, while solved claims remain grounded by trusted Lean verification. 

Paper organization. Section 2 situates our work among self-evolving agents, LLM-based provers, and coevolution / automatic curricula. Section 3 presents the system: the mutable workspace and evolution interface, the verifier-grounded proof-context contract, and the coevolving-benchmark loop with its parent selection. Section 4 reports the experimental study — capability under the self-hardening benchmark, a fixed-vs-coevolving ablation, workflow/tool self-modification, and proof-context quality. Section 5 discusses the main implications and concludes. The appendix collects experimental details, the benchmark-update algorithm, a worked example, and the lineage record of the accepted run. 

# 2 Related Work 

Our work sits at the intersection of three lines of research — self-evolving agents, LLM-based formal theorem proving, and coevolution with automatic curricula — which we review in turn. 

Self-evolving agents. Recent work on self-evolving agents studies how agents can improve by rewriting their own code or prompts [23, 34, 7, 32, 21], by searching over agent designs and work-flows [10, 37, 24, 33, 3], or by evolving programs against an automatic evaluator [22, 17], rather than relying on a fixed hand-designed workflow; see [26, 8] for surveys. DGM [35] evolves an archive of code-level agents, Hyperagents [36] distinguish a task agent from a meta agent that modifies the improvement process itself, and related group-evolving systems study population-level self-improvement [4, 31]. Our work transfers this line to Lean theorem proving and further allows the benchmark to coevolve with the proof agent. 

LLM agents for formal mathematical proof. Recent work couples LLMs with formal provers through proof generation, sketching, retrieval, compiler feedback, and repair [18, 14, 30, 25], with benchmarks such as miniF2F [38] and PutnamBench [27]. LEAP [15] and Goedel-Architect [5] most directly demonstrate the importance of agentic proof workflows: both build a hand-designed, static workflow around a fixed prover — LEAP maintains its proof plan as an AND-OR DAG of intermediate Lean lemmas, while Goedel-Architect generates and iteratively refines a blueprint, a dependency graph of definitions and lemmas — with Goedel-Architect reaching 99 .2% on miniF2F-test. Our work instead makes the proof workflow evolvable, while requiring Lean-grounded proof context without hard-coding a single representation. 

Coevolution and automatic curricula. Coevolving solvers with environments or curricula is well established outside formal proof, including POET, MCC, PAIRED, and automatic-curriculum methods [29, 2, 6, 19, 28, 1]. Recent LLM-agent work also explores agent–environment or agent– benchmark coevolution [9, 4, 31, 11]. Red Queen Gödel Machine (RQGM) [13] coevolves agents with their evaluators: it targets settings where no fixed ground-truth answer may be available, so the evaluator and the criterion of success must themselves adapt. Formal mathematical proof, by 4contrast, has a fixed correctness criterion and a strict requirement for proof validity, so we keep the evaluator fixed as a trusted Lean verifier and coevolve benchmark difficulty instead. Thus, RQGM coevolves the criterion of success, whereas our system keeps the criterion fixed and coevolves the difficulty distribution over formally verifiable proof tasks. 

# 3 Method 

This section presents our system: a fixed, trusted runtime wrapping a mutable, evolvable workspace (Section 3.1); a proof-context contract that keeps the self-rewriting agent inspectable and hard to spoof (Section 3.2); and the coevolving benchmark with its parent selection (Section 3.3, Section 3.4). 

3.1 Mutable workspace and evolution interface 

Our system separates a fixed, trusted runtime from a mutable workspace. The trusted runtime is responsible for all mechanisms that determine correctness and reward — Lean verification, evalua-tion, benchmark management, and proof-context validation — and stays outside the evolutionary search. The mutable workspace holds the agent-facing proof workflow together with the meta-level logic that adapts it, and is the sole object of evolution: across generations, agents rewrite this workspace through a constrained edit interface while the trusted runtime remains untouched. A central design choice is to separate code validity from proof success . A mutated agent first passes through a code-level stage — basic execution and smoke tests confirming that its rewritten workflow runs and returns the expected interface. Passing this stage admits the agent to evalu-ation but does not by itself mark any theorem as solved: whether a proof obligation is solved is decided solely by the trusted runtime, which re-verifies the generated proof under a trusted Lean snapshot (Section 3.2). However the agent rewrites its workflow, tools, or proof-producing code, the solved/unsolved verdict is determined by Lean alone, and benchmark updates are driven by Lean-verified solve records rather than by anything the agent reports about itself. Against this backdrop the seed agent is kept deliberately minimal — a single proof attempt that is checked once, with no repair loop, search, or proof decomposition — so that any later repair behavior, search strategy, or proof-context structure can be attributed to the self-evolving process rather than to a hand-designed proof workflow. 

3.2 Enforced, trustworthy proof context: free to evolve, hard to spoof 

The proof-context contract has two parts. Part A specifies what each solve attempt must emit and what minimal grounding requirements the proof context must satisfy. Part B describes the trusted re-verification layer that prevents a mutable agent from faking solved proofs or proof-context certificates. Together, these two parts make the agent’s proof attempts inspectable while keeping all reported solves and benchmark records grounded in Lean-verified evidence. 

Part A: the contract. Every solve attempt returns a triple {ok , proof_body , proof_context }.The proof context records the mathematical structure of the attempt, such as claims, lemmas, subgoals, dependencies, and how they support the final theorem. It is kept separate from the workflow trace, which records LLM attempts, repair loops, and tool calls. The representation of the proof context is free: the agent may use a graph, a tree, a lemma table, or another structure. The validator enforces only a small set of grounding requirements. First, a root context item must exist. Second, the context must contain at least one mathematical claim, subgoal, or lemma besides the root. Third, dependency edges, if present, must point to known 5items. Fourth, proof-attempt and diagnostic records do not count as mathematical context. Fifth, any item marked as solved must be backed by Lean-verified evidence. Finally, if the agent provides optional formal fields such as a lean_statement and a proof_body , the trusted runtime can verify that item independently and return node-level feedback. The principle is that representation is flexible, but groundedness is mandatory. 

Part B: trusted re-verification and spoofing resistance. Because the agent rewrites code adjacent to scoring, none of its self-reports can be trusted. The trusted runtime therefore re-checks both final proofs and proof-context certificates before they affect any score or benchmark record. First, the final score ignores all of the mutable code’s self-reported status; the fixed runtime inde-pendently re-verifies the task statement together with the returned proof body under a trusted Lean snapshot. Second, top-level Lean commands in the returned proof body are rejected, preventing the agent from substituting an unrelated theorem. Third, certificates are sanitized: a proof-context item is marked solved only after its associated Lean evidence passes trusted verification. Fourth, immutable runtime files and verifier configuration are protected against tampering; any detected modification is reverted or rejected, and recorded. Fifth, mutable entry points run in isolated worker processes on a copied workspace, so the trusted parent does not import or execute mutable modules directly. Sixth, real Lean proofs are required: sorry and admit are rejected. 

3.3 Coevolving benchmark 

The benchmark is drawn from a candidate pool stratified into difficulty levels L1 < L 2 < L 3

(defined in Appendix A), chosen so that the seed has substantial success on L1 but low success on 

L3. Between generations, the champion drives the benchmark update. A single difficulty coefficient 

c links the two halves of the loop: it both normalizes the selection scores (Section 3.4) and records the accumulated change in benchmark difficulty. 

Benchmark update mechanism. The full procedure is given in Algorithm 1 in Appendix B. At the end of each generation, the benchmark is updated only if the champion meets the update thresh-old: its raw solve rate on the current benchmark must exceed γ = 0 .30 ; otherwise the benchmark is carried over unchanged. Once the threshold is met, the update proceeds. A task is eligible for retirement only if it is solved by all agents evaluated in that generation, and the update retires at most κ such tasks. For each retired task at level ℓ, the replacement level is determined by the champion’s current solve rate mℓ on level ℓ. If mℓ ≥ τ with τ = 0 .70 , the retired task is replaced by a task from the next level ℓ + 1 ; otherwise, it is replaced laterally by a new task from the same level ℓ. Newly inserted tasks are treated as unsolved until they are evaluated in a later generation, so mℓ is recomputed after each replacement. This makes the update self-throttling: a level can graduate only while the champion’s level-specific mastery remains high, and repeated replacements reduce the measured mastery rate, preventing abrupt benchmark hardening. When selecting replacement tasks, the update also prefers domains where the archive has accu-mulated more failures, so the new benchmark reflects both level difficulty and observed population weaknesses. 

Single-anchor recalibration and cross-generation comparability. Because the benchmark hardens, raw solve rate is not comparable across generations. We restore comparability with a 

single-anchor recalibration: the champion is re-evaluated on the new benchmark and the difficulty 6coefficient is updated multiplicatively, 

ct+1 = ct · rt

max  rt+1 , ϵ  , c0 = 1 ,

where rt is the champion’s raw score on Bt, and the difficulty-normalized score reported for every agent is q = r × c. By construction the champion’s normalized score is preserved across the recalibration (it is the anchor), so an agent evaluated on a harder benchmark and one evaluated on an easier benchmark are placed on a single scale. The per-step ratio is small (typically ≲ 1.4

for our pool sizes) but compounds across generations, so the coefficient measures how much harder the current benchmark is than the original baseline; ϵ guards against degenerate ratios when the champion’s re-evaluated score is very low. 

3.4 Parent selection within a generation 

Within a generation, parents are sampled from the archive in proportion to a DGM-style weight that rewards capability and discounts agents that have already produced many children: 

q = r × c, w = max( q, 0) · 11 + nc

.

Here q is the difficulty-normalized score, r the raw solve rate, c the difficulty coefficient (Section 3.3), and nc the agent’s current child count; parents are drawn with replacement ∝ w. Selection uses 

within-generation streaming : each accepted child is archived as soon as it is evaluated and immedi-ately becomes eligible as a parent for later attempts in the same generation, so an early strong child can seed its own siblings. The child count nc also includes pending, not-yet-evaluated children, so the same factor discounts agents with outstanding offspring and damps runaway selection of a single lineage within a generation. 

# 4 Results 

This section reports held-out capability across evolution generations, the comparison with a fixed-benchmark baseline, and the evolution of workflow structure, mutable tools, and proof-context quality. During evolution, agents are evaluated on a 76 -task active benchmark stratified into difficulty levels L1–L3: author-constructed single-tactic warm-up lemmas, miniF2F problems [38], and Put-namBench problems [27]. To make results comparable across generations, we also evaluate agents on a fixed held-out miniF2F test split of 244 problems. This test split is disjoint from the curriculum and is never used for training. Both the coevolving run and the fixed-benchmark baseline complete 

15 active generations. For the fixed-benchmark baseline, where raw scores are measured on the same benchmark throughout, we evaluate the two highest-scoring agents on the held-out test split. For the coevolving run, where the active benchmark changes over time, we evaluate selected agents across the trajectory. Backend, hyperparameters, hardware, and runtime details are provided in Appendix A. 

4.1 Capability under a self-hardening benchmark 

Because benchmark difficulty changes throughout evolution, we evaluate high-scoring agents on the fixed held-out test split, which provides a stable yardstick for identifying the strongest agent. As shown in Table 1, held-out solve rate rises from 12 .7% for the seed agent to 45 .1% at generation 15. 7Table 1: Held-out miniF2F test solve rates for evaluated coevolving agents. Gen 0 Gen 2 Gen 4 Gen 5 Gen 9 Gen 10 Gen 13 Gen 14 Gen 15 Solve rate 12.7% 38.9% 29.9% 29.9% 11.9% 25.4% 40.6% 25.4% 45.1% 

Agent seed c12 c26 c39 c52 c86 c99 c141 c144 The solve rate does not increase monotonically, reflecting that selection optimizes active-benchmark score rather than held-out performance. At the same time, the benchmark difficulty coefficient rises from 1.00 to 3.17 ; see Table 2 in Appendix D for details. 

4.2 Fixed vs. coevolving benchmark 

The fixed-benchmark baseline reaches lower held-out solve rates than the coevolving run. Because the fixed benchmark never changes, raw training scores are directly comparable; we therefore evalu-ate the two highest-scoring fixed-benchmark agents on the held-out test split. Their held-out solve rates are 32 .0% and 26 .6% . For the coevolving run, raw training scores are measured under changing benchmark difficulty, so we evaluate 9 selected agents across the trajectory. By generation 15, the best coevolving agent reaches a held-out solve rate of 45 .1% , higher than either fixed-benchmark agent. The fixed-benchmark run scores lower because its evolutionary pressure becomes weak after early mastery. Once an agent solves a stable subset of the fixed 76 tasks, later mutations are selected mainly for preserving or slightly improving performance on the same problems. The benchmark does not retire mastered tasks or introduce harder ones, so later agents mostly explore local repair and tool variants without being forced to broaden their capability. Thus, the fixed-benchmark run keeps changing code, but mostly around the same narrow set of solutions, which limits held-out generalization. 

4.3 Workflow self-modification 

The high-scoring workflow is repair-centered, not decomposition-centered. Across the accepted lineage, selected agents mostly preserve a compact Lean-error repair loop: generate a full proof, run Lean, use the error message and lemma-name checks, and retry with bounded feedback (Figure 2 and Table 3). This winning workflow pattern is cheap, directly tied to final solve rate, and easier for selection to reward than a blueprint-first decomposition-based workflow. This does not mean that decomposition-based workflows are absent from the search. On the contrary, the mutation traces repeatedly reason about proof blueprints, subgoals, isolated sub-lemma verification, and deeper proof-context trees. The gap is between reasoning about these workflows and shipping them. Several agents judge the change too large or risky and fall back to label-only nodes, degenerate whole-theorem nodes, or conventional repair machinery: c12 writes the binder-isolation fix that verified subnodes would need but improves instead through lemma tooling, and c39 later defers isolated sub-lemma verification after observing that variables are unbound. This behavior is rational under the sparse objective: if only the final Lean-checked theorem is rewarded, a compact proof body plus compiler-feedback repair is often a better use of budget than constructing and checking intermediate proof nodes. We now examine the decomposition-based workflows that actually evolved: three main branches shown as bold nodes in the evolution tree (Appendix D, Figure 2). First, the c22 branch makes an early attempt at a decomposition-and-prove fallback. This branch tries to add lemma indexing and 8retrieval machinery around decomposition, but the implementation hits the mutable-process guard, the trusted runtime’s ban on spawning subprocesses. Its descendant c23 removes the subprocess-based machinery and simplifies the workflow, but the simplified version collapses to raw 0.132 . This branch therefore shows an early failure mode: decomposition needs extra tooling, but that tooling can easily become too brittle or incompatible with the trusted runtime. Second, the c44 branch evolves genuine node-level verification, but only in a shallow form. The c44/c47 lineage asks for self-contained sub-lemmas, carries the ambient binders into each lemma statement, and verifies many subgoals independently in Lean. This is a real improvement over post-hoc have -extraction, but it is not yet a full decomposition-and-assembly workflow: the branch mainly certifies local helper nodes and does not seriously address how those verified lemmas should be composed back into the final theorem. Trace-level problems, such as c44’s null root certificate, can also invalidate otherwise meaningful subgoal evidence. Thus c44/c47 improve proof-context structure, but remain shallow and do not become the winning route. Third, the c26 lineage is the most important later case because it eventually pushes decomposition into an explicit plan-prove-assemble workflow. Earlier agents mostly use decomposition after repair, or only as proof-context structure. By contrast, the later c141, shown in Appendix C and Listing 1, introduces a subgoal-prover workflow: it first plans auxiliary lemmas, then tries to prove them, and finally attempts to assemble the main theorem from those lemmas. This is the closest the run comes to a decomposition-first workflow. It fails not because it ignores assembly, but because assembly is exactly the hard part: generated helper lemmas often do not match the final theorem’s needed context, the interfaces between lemma planning, lemma proving, and final assembly create extra failure points, and the longer prompts increase timeout and truncation risk. Since selection rewards only final theorem success, this richer structure is not protected when its final assembly fails. Repair itself also does not grow without bound. Proof generation runs under a bounded output budget and a per-task wall-clock cap (Appendix A). When repeated repair accumulates long prompts and error histories, proof-generation calls can be truncated or time out; these errors are visible to the agent and become pressure to shorten the next workflow. The large-repair variants show this saturation: c19 expands the loop to ten attempts but falls to raw 0.368 , and c51 raises monolithic repair to twelve attempts but scores only 0.263 . Its descendant c52 keeps the repair idea but shifts toward early native_decide , shorter prompts, bans on hallucinated lemmas, and streamlined result construction. Thus evolution preserves verifier-feedback repair as a workflow principle, but not unbounded repair: very large repair loops are competed away. 

4.4 Mutable tools 

Most evolved tools target hallucinated Lean names. Early agents add simple #check probes and Mathlib source search, so invented Lean names can be rejected before they enter the fi-nal proof. Later agents make the same idea more systematic: they batch name checks through 

verify_lemma_list , pass verified signatures into the prompt, and keep small caches or namespace-aware indexes so that names such as Nat.gcd_dvd_left or Nat.dvd_mul_right can be confirmed before being used. c96 turns this into a cached lemma checker with namespace-aware search and a verified-only fallback, while c144 feeds exact verified signatures and source-grep suggestions back into the monolithic repair loop. These tools do not create a new high-level proving strategy by themselves. Their main role is to make repair safer: when Lean reports an unknown identifier or type error, the workflow can ban the bad name, suggest a verified alternative, and retry with concrete Lean feedback. 94.5 Proof context 

Proof contexts become inspectable but rarely grow into deep verified proof graphs. Proof-context quality is logged but not rewarded (Section 3.4), so it should be read as a diagnostic signal rather than a direct optimization target. Empirically, it stays roughly stable across generations even as the final solve rate changes. The lineage record explains why: agents often preserve inspectable proof context, but rarely turn it into verified mathematical decomposition trees (Table 3). The record shows that agents in early and middle generations mostly construct proof context 

backward from the final Lean proof rather than planning a proof graph in advance. Agents such as c11, c12, c25, and c26 extract have statements from the generated proof body and attach them as lemma or subgoal nodes beneath a single main-theorem node. Their mutation traces explicitly discuss decomposition-based workflows, subgoal verification, and per-node proof contexts, but the executed nodes are usually not self-contained Lean theorems: they depend on binders, local hy-potheses, and type context from the surrounding proof. When isolated for node-level verification, these nodes often fail with unknown identifiers, type mismatches, or unsolved goals. This phase therefore increases the number of nodes, but the realized structure is mostly a shallow support star of the form have-* → main-theorem , not a deep proof tree or reusable DAG. The c44/c47 branch is the first meaningful node-level verification attempt. It partially solves the binder-isolation problem by asking for self-contained sub-lemmas whose statements carry the ambi-ent variables as explicit binders, and by attaching Lean lean_statement /proof_body evidence to some proof-context nodes. Later descendants show both the promise and the limit of this direction. c99 keeps the c47 structure and produces a subgoal_tree_with_formal_lemmas context, with some helper nodes passing formal verification; however, these nodes remain shallow supports for one final theorem, not a reusable multi-layer graph. c144 reaches a high solve rate, but its proof plan mainly guides monolithic repair, and many extracted have nodes either fail isolated verification or lack the full lean_statement /proof_body pair required for node-level checking. c145 makes the graph label more explicit as a subgoal_dag , but its nodes are mostly open or label-only supports and the score drops. Thus later descendants retain the winning repair-centered mechanisms—lemma checking, bounded repair, and native_decide fast paths—while proof context stabilizes as shallow verified or label-only supports for the main theorem rather than a deep dependency graph. 

# 5 Discussion 

This paper studies whether a Lean proof agent can improve by rewriting its own proof workflow, tools, and proof-context representation while remaining grounded by a fixed verifier. We build such an agent and pair it with a coevolving benchmark that hardens as the current champion masters easier tasks. The main claim is not that the verifier changes or becomes stronger: Lean remains the trusted judge throughout. Rather, the mutable code around Lean learns better ways to use verifier feedback, check lemma names, repair failed proofs, and record proof structure. The experiments show that useful mathematical workflow structure can evolve under this fixed-verifier setting. The lineage develops verifier-adjacent tools for preventing hallucinated Lean names, and it eventually evolves genuine node-level verification for self-contained sub-lemmas. This sup-ports the feasibility of node-level verification in a self-modifying proof agent: mutable agents can invent new proof-context formats, while the fixed runtime can still audit whether claimed nodes are actually Lean-verified. The fixed-vs-coevolving ablation also shows why benchmark hardening matters. A fixed benchmark makes raw scores directly comparable, but it gives weaker curriculum pressure once the agent reaches a plateau. The coevolving benchmark keeps the training signal closer to the agent’s current frontier. 10 After 15 generations, held-out miniF2F test solve rate rises from 12 .7% for the seed agent to 

45 .1% for c144 at generation 15. This is a substantial improvement from code-level self-evolution alone, but it remains well below the strongest hand-designed proof agents (Goedel-Architect reaches 

99 .2% on miniF2F-test, with a different backend). Our lineage audit suggests a main reason for the gap: the winning workflow is still mostly repair-centered. High-scoring agents repeatedly generate a complete proof, ask Lean for errors, and repair the result with bounded feedback. Decomposition-based workflows do appear, and later agents increasingly reason about subgoals and node-level verification, but these structures usually remain shallow and fragile when they must be assembled back into the final theorem. We therefore view the current result as evidence for a direction rather than a finished proof assistant. Longer runs, larger populations, or rewards that directly value verified decomposition may make decomposition-based workflows a more important evolutionary route. In the present 

15 -generation runs, however, the agent has not yet evolved a deep, durable proof-context graph. Looking further ahead, we see a natural path in pushing this approach into other domains where formal, Lean-verified reasoning is essential—such as quantum computing—where machine-checked proofs of correctness could prove especially valuable. 

# Acknowledgments 

YL, ZW, YG and JL are supported in part by the University of Pittsburgh, School of Computing and Information, Department of Computer Science, Pitt Cyber, Pitt Momentum fund, PQI Community Collaboration Awards, John C. Mascaro Faculty Scholar in Sustainability, Switzerland NSF award 2000-1-243053, NSF award 2535915, Thinking Machines Lab and Cisco Research. This research used resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported under Contract DE-AC05-00OR22725. 

# A Experimental details and hyperparameters 

We report a single-run study; quantitative comparisons therefore come without variance estimates and should be interpreted accordingly. 

Backend, verifier, and hardware. A single LLM backend — DeepSeek deepseek-v4-pro over an OpenAI-compatible API ( 1M-token context) — drives both the proof workflow and its self-modification. We use this backend to keep long evolution runs affordable while retaining enough capability for Lean proof search. Decoding is greedy (temperature 0, fixed random seed). LLM calls use a 600 s API timeout, and the backend treats max-token truncation as an error rather than passing an incomplete proof to Lean. Each mutable proof workflow is also run in an isolated worker with a hard wall-clock cap (set by PROOF_HYPERAGENT_WORKFLOW_TIMEOUT_S ; 1200 s throughout the reported runs). Even at temperature 0 the backend shows non-negligible output instability on boundary problems, so small differences should be interpreted cautiously. Correctness is checked by real Lean 4 with Mathlib ( v4.30.0 ; mock Lean is disabled in scored runs). The evolution orchestration and all Lean compilation and verification run on a single multi-core CPU host with the Mathlib environment staged on local storage; the model is served remotely. 

Compute cost. A single 15 -generation coevolution run evaluates up to three accepted children per generation on the 76 -task benchmark and performs the mutation and smoke-testing steps. Wall-clock time scales roughly linearly with the number of generations, with held-out test evaluation 11 adding separate benchmark jobs. Because the model is a remote API, this wall-clock is dominated by Lean compilation, verification, and long proof-generation calls rather than local compute. 

Benchmark and held-out test set. The agent is trained on Lean 4 tasks drawn from a candidate pool stratified into difficulty levels: L1 consists of author-constructed single-tactic warm-up lemmas, 

L2 of miniF2F problems (valid split, disjoint from the held-out test set), and L3 of PutnamBench problems. These levels impose a deliberate evolution gradient : across the candidate pool, the seed’s per-level solve rate falls steeply — ≈ 0.52 on L1, ≈ 0.18 on L2, and ≈ 0.00 on L3 — so each level is a rung just beyond the one below. The coevolving active benchmark holds 76 tasks; at t=0 its level mix is L1:L2:L3 = 27:46:3 , drawn from a candidate pool of 365 tasks ( 52 at L1, 57 at L2, and 

256 at L3). We compose this initial mix so that the seed’s overall solve rate is ≈ 0.37 (28 /76 ) — challenging enough to leave room for improvement while still providing an informative evolutionary signal. Generalization is measured on the held-out miniF2F test split ( 244 problems), disjoint from the valid-split curriculum and never used for selection. 

Experimental hyperparameters. Both experiments run for 15 active evolution generations after the seed, with up to three accepted children per generation, aborting after three consecutive backend failures and allowing at most six mutation attempts per generation. Agent identifiers are global mutation-attempt IDs across the run, including variants rejected before evaluation, so they need not match the number of accepted children. The benchmark-update threshold is a raw champion solve rate of γ = 0 .30 ; the graduation threshold is τ = 0 .70 and the curriculum step 

σ = 1 ; each generation retires up to κ = 6 mastered tasks (the fixed-benchmark baseline uses κ = 0 ), replaces them with domain-matched tasks, and halts replacement when no eligible task remains in the weak domains. Recalibration uses ϵ = 0 .1 in the multiplicative update ct+1 = ct ·rt/ max( rt+1 , ϵ ),and time and token penalties are set to 0.

# B Benchmark-update algorithm 

Algorithm 1 states the full mastery-throttled benchmark update whose core mechanisms — the champion check, weakness-driven selection, mastery-throttled graduation, self-throttling, and single-anchor recalibration — are described in Section 3.3. 12 Algorithm 1 Mastery-throttled benchmark update (generation t → t+1 ). 

Require: active benchmark Bt with curriculum levels; the champion and its per-task solve results; candidate pool P ; update threshold γ; mastery threshold τ ; replacement budget κ; step σ

Ensure: next benchmark Bt+1 and difficulty coefficient ct+1  

> 1:

if the champion’s raw solve rate is below γ then  

> 2:

return Bt unchanged ▷ champion check  

> 3:

end if  

> 4:

D ← domains most failed across the whole archive ▷ population weaknesses  

> 5:

R ← up to κ tasks of Bt solved by all agents this generation, lowest level first  

> 6:

for each level ℓ do  

> 7:

tot[ ℓ], sol[ ℓ] ← champion’s total / solved counts on level ℓ 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

A ← ∅ 

> 10:

for each retired task q at level ℓ in R do  

> 11:

mℓ ← sol[ ℓ]/tot[ ℓ] ▷ recomputed after every swap  

> 12:

if mℓ ≥ τ then  

> 13:

ℓ⋆ ← ℓ + σ ▷ graduate  

> 14:

else  

> 15:

ℓ⋆ ← ℓ ▷ lateral refresh  

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

a ← unused task from P at level ℓ⋆, preferring domains D 

> 18:

if a = nil and ℓ⋆̸ = ℓ then  

> 19:

a ← unused task from P at level ℓ ▷ fallback to lateral  

> 20:

end if  

> 21:

if a = nil then  

> 22:

skip this swap  

> 23:

else  

> 24:

A ← A ∪ { a}; mark q for removal  

> 25:

tot[ ℓ] ← tot[ ℓ] − 1; if the champion solved q then sol[ ℓ] ← sol[ ℓ] − 1 ▷ self-throttle  

> 26:

tot[ ℓ⋆] ← tot[ ℓ⋆] + 1 ▷ added task assumed unsolved  

> 27:

end if  

> 28:

end for  

> 29:

Bt+1 ← (Bt \ R) ∪ A 

> 30:

rt+1 ← raw score of the champion re-evaluated on Bt+1 ▷ single anchor  

> 31:

ct+1 ← ct · rt/ max( rt+1 , ϵ ) ▷ compounds with an epsilon floor  

> 32:

return Bt+1 , c t+1 

# C A worked example: an evolved subgoal-prover workflow (agent c141) 

As a worked example we show agent c141, the late-stage child whose evolved workflow makes the most explicit attempt at a standalone subgoal-prover workflow. Its meta agent added a 

subgoal_prover.py module: after quick tactics and a short monolithic repair loop, the work-flow asks the model for a lemma plan, proves the proposed lemmas one by one, and then tries to assemble the final theorem from those lemmas (Listing 1). This is the clearest instance in the run of the structured, node-bearing proof context that the proof-context contract is meant to make 13 inspectable.    

> def solve_task(task, policy, runtime): body = _try_quick_tactics(task, runtime) # 1. fast auto-tactics if body is not None: return _record(body, "auto_tactic") last_solution, ok, attempts, _ = _try_monolithic( task, policy, runtime, start_time, tool_text, verified_lemmas) if ok: # 2. monolithic repair first proof_body = last_solution strategy = "monolithic" else: sub = _try_subgoal(task, policy, runtime, start_time, tool_text, verified_lemmas) if sub[0]: # 3. explicit subgoal workflow proof_body, _, proof_nodes, edges = sub strategy = "subgoal" else: proof_body, ok = _try_safe_mode( task, policy, runtime, start_time, verified_lemmas) strategy = "safe_fallback" if ok else "monolithic_fallback"

Listing 1: Core control flow of c141’s evolved solve_task : quick tactics, a short monolithic repair loop, then an explicit subgoal-prover workflow with lemma planning, lemma proofs, and final assembly. The subgoal prompt is more ambitious than a have -block parser: it asks for independent lemma statements with explicit binders, then separately proves and assembles them (Listing 2). 

> "Given a theorem, break it down into auxiliary lemmas. " "Each lemma should be a self-contained statement with all variables explicitly " "quantified. Do NOT use the theorem’s context implicitly. " "Output up to 5 lemmas as JSON objects with keys: name, statement, explanation."

Listing 2: c141’s subgoal-planning prompt (abridged): propose self-contained helper lemmas before proving and assembling them. Two evolved design choices explain why this more explicit decomposition-based workflow was nonetheless competed away . First, decomposition still runs after the monolithic route has failed, so it is asked to recover exactly the hardest cases. Second, the separate lemma-plan, lemma-proving, and assembly interfaces add new places where the proof can fail: JSON parsing, non-self-contained lemma statements, and helper lemmas that cannot be introduced into the final Lean environment, as well as longer prompts and a higher risk of timeout. The net effect is a structurally richer workflow whose trace is more informative, but whose solve rate remains below the repair-centered champions (cf. the lineage record in Appendix D). 

# D Evolution record of the accepted lineage 

Section C showed one evolved agent in detail; here we record the accepted lineage as an evolutionary history, with representative rows for early generations and, for active generations 10–15, all evaluated accepted children available at writing time. The goal is to show which workflow, tool, node-level verification, and proof-context changes were proposed, which ones actually ran, and which ones survived selection (Figure 2 and Table 3). The main lineage-level pattern is that compact repair mechanisms survive, while richer decomposition-based workflows appear repeatedly but are usually 14 pruned. During most of the observed run, agents discuss decomposition-based workflows and per-node verification yet defer them: the sparse pass/fail reward (Section 3.4) assigns no gradient to proof structure, so an agent that maximizes solve rate often skips it. The highest raw-score agent, c12, wrote out the exact binder fix that node-level verification requires and then skipped it, improving instead through lemma tooling; a later champion (c39) reasoned that an isolated sub-lemma “cannot be verified” because its variables are unbound and left it “for now.” Table 2: Difficulty coefficient of the coevolving active benchmark. The coefficient is used for cross-generation normalization and is not a held-out solve rate. Gen 0 Gen 1 Gen 2 Gen 3 Gen 4 Gen 5 Gen 6 Gen 7 Gen 8 Gen 9 Gen 10 Gen 11 Gen 12 Gen 13 Gen 14 Gen 15 Difficulty coeff. 1.00 1.00 1.11 1.18 1.27 1.40 1.44 1.59 1.76 2.07 2.47 2.75 2.75 3.17 3.17 3.17 seed         

> c3
> c0
> c8
> c11 c12
> c10
> c22 c23
> c24
> c25
> c26
> c39
> c38
> c37 c42
> c40
> c43
> c48
> c44 c45
> c46
> c47
> c50
> c51 c52
> c83
> c86
> c93
> c96
> c96
> c98
> c101
> c137
> c41 c140
> c141
> c143
> c144
> c146
> c82 c92 c94
> c99
> c100
> c19
> c145

Figure 2: Evolution tree for the accepted lineage. Bold nodes mark agents with decomposition-based workflows. Darker node colors indicate agents evolved in later generations. 15 Table 3: Four-dimension evolution record of the accepted lineage (single coevolving run). Intent :proposed in the agent’s mutation trace; Outcome : shipped, evaluated, and retained or lost under selection. Raw = solve rate on that generation’s benchmark, whose difficulty coefficient rises 1.00 →

3.17 by active generation 15, so raw scores are not directly comparable across generations. Shaded cells mark proposed changes that were not realized, not retained, or net-negative; un-shaded done 

cells in the node-level verification column (c44, c47) mark genuinely Lean-certified sub-lemmas. The workflow columns are restricted to the control-flow choice between repair and decomposition-based workflows; Lean-name utilities are separated under mutable tools. Trace invalid means the emitted proof context failed the validator’s grounding checks. The seed itself is not listed; c0 is the first accepted child. ⋆ generation champion, ⋆⋆ highest raw-score agent. Earlier rows are representative; for active generations 10–15, all evaluated accepted children available at writing time are shown. 

1. Workflow 2. Mutable tools 3. Node-level verif. 4. Proof-context depth 

Agent (raw) Intent Outcome Intent Outcome Intent Outcome Intent Outcome c0 ( .368 ) monolithic repair 

done :simple retry loop lemma-name probe 

part. :inlined 

#check 

– – – – (flat, 1 node) c3 ( .526 ) error-feedback repair 

done :repair stays monolithic lemma existence helper 

done :

#check +source search – – – – (0 math nodes) c8 ⋆ (.553 ) stronger repair loop 

done :bounded repair, no decomp. verified signatures 

part. :mostly prompt-side annotate / decompose into nodes 

n/i :text-only labels (“un-verified”) structured context 

part. : mild (2 math nodes) c10 ( .447 ) repair hardening 

part. :repair policy regresses decl cache / FD guard 

part. :inlined, no durable tool API whole theorem as one node 

part. :degenerate (node ≡

proof) – – (flat) c11 ( .487 ) repair + shallow decomp. 

done :repair first; 

have nodes post hoc batch lemma verification 

done : edits 

tools.py 

build + isolate-verify 

have 

sub-nodes 

n/i : 7 nodes built, binder-isolation fails deep subgoal tree 

part. :richest (7 nodes) but unverified c12 ⋆⋆ 

(.618 )compact repair + decomp. idea 

done :repair wins; decomp. skipped verified lemma catalogue 

part. :prompt-side, no new tool API wrote binder fix + planned de-composition verification 

n/i :skipped; 0 verified sub-nodes subgoal tree part. : ∼5nodes but tooling steps, not math c19 ( .368 ) large repair budget 

n/i : 10 attempts hurt stability expanded lemma cache 

n/i : no durable advantage whole-theorem node 

part. :degenerate – – (flat) c22 †

(.368 )decomp. fallback 

n/i :crash-prone, not selected 

grep index / lookup 

n/i : guard blocks subprocess; tool dropped isolate-verify each have 

subgoal 

n/i :deferred (“too risky”) LLM sub-lemma skeleton then assemble 

n/i : skipped (“large change”) c26 ⋆

(.566 )repair →

decomp. fallback 

done : 8 repair attempts, then 4 decomp. expanded verified-lemma tools 

done :prefetch + source search per-subgoal verify (first real attempt) 

part. : runs but hangs on hard tasks, falls back subgoal tree part. : built, often monolithic fallback c39 ⋆

(.487 )repair with deferred decomp. 

done :repair remains main path lemma 

#check /resolve 

done : edits 

tools.py 

isolate-verify but “vars unbound” 

n/i :deferred; 

have -parsed labels only richer context 

part. :label-only nodes 

Continued on next page 

16 Table 3: Four-dimension evolution record of the accepted lineage (continued). 

1. Workflow 2. Mutable tools 3. Node-level verif. 4. Proof-context depth 

Agent (raw) Intent Outcome Intent Outcome Intent Outcome Intent Outcome c41 ⋆

(.421 )monolithic repair 

done : no decomp. route 

lemma_ exists 

/ cache 

n/i : mostly inlined; 

tools.py 

untouched subgoal nodes + per-node verify 

n/i :cosmetic flag only subgoal tree – (shallow, 1 claim) c44 ⋆

(.408 )decomp. workflow 

done :sublemma-first workflow cached 

#check 

existence 

done : edits 

tools.py 

verify self-contained subgoals 

done : 141 

certified 

(root still null) real decom-position tree 

done :verified shallow graph c47 ⋆

(.434 )extend c44 decomp. 

done :two-tier decomp. workflow verify searched lemmas 

done : edits 

tools.py 

verify each subgoal 

done : 150 

certified ;rest label-only richest tree (avg 17 )

part. : 173 

verified, 958 

label-only c52 ⋆

(.329 )back to monolithic repair 

done :shorter repair; decomp. inactive complete lemma index 

done : edits 

tools.py 

(not selected) 

n/i :inherited de-composition dead, 0/76 

fires – – (flat, 2 nodes) c82 ( .145 ) repair c52 decomp. path 

n/i : over-constrained; 11/76 unknown-lemma rejection + short prompts 

done :stricter checks, 

force_short 

inherited subgoal checks 

n/i : trace valid but low solve rate decomp. supports 

part. : high score, shallow graph c83 ( .224 ) verify-and-repair loop 

done :simple Lean feedback loop 

lemma_ exists 

+prompt hints 

part. :backend errors remain – – repair context 

part. :shallow; weaker than parent c86 ⋆

(.382 )repair hardening 

done :lemma pre-check + bounded repair; no decomp. route 

lemma_ checker 

/symbol grep 

done : new helper, safe-lemma cleanup node feedback 

n/i : trace invalid; no durable subgoal verification shallow supports 

part. : many events, not a deep graph c92 ( .040 ) very large repair budget 

n/i : 20–25 attempts collapse to 3/76 signature retrieval 

n/i : prompt bloat dominates proof-node checks 

n/i : invalid trace shallow supports 

n/i : mostly failures c93 ⋆

(.211 )verify-and-repair loop 

done :simple Lean-feedback loop, low score def/abbrev index + repair history 

done :cached Lean-name checks – – repair context 

part. :inspectable but shallow c94 ( .066 ) simplify after c92 

done : fast monolithic workflow, still weak source grep idea 

part. : no recovery – – flat context n/i : only 5/76 c96 ( .290 ) safe-mode repair 

done :verified-only fallback after c95 crash lemma-checker cache 

done :broader namespace search inherited subgoal parser 

part. :parser fixed, not dominant shallow supports 

part. : no new deep graph c97 ⋆

(.303 )decomp.-first workflow 

done : plan subgoals, prove, assemble; fallback repair verified catalogue 

part. : safer prompt + lemma filtering verify each helper lemma 

done :node-level feedback ;compose fragile subgoal tree part. : real but shallow, no break-through 

Continued on next page 

17 Table 3: Four-dimension evolution record of the accepted lineage (continued). 

1. Workflow 2. Mutable tools 3. Node-level verif. 4. Proof-context depth 

Agent (raw) Intent Outcome Intent Outcome Intent Outcome Intent Outcome c98 ( .224 ) multi-sample repair 

done : more attempts + namespace scan, weak score FD guard + lemma ranking 

part. : fixes engineering, not solve rate per-node check 

part. : self-contained nodes attempted math context 

part. :shallow, trace invalid c99 ⋆

(.290 )repair + inherited decomp. 

done : c47 branch keeps re-pair/subgoal attempts fake-lemma autocorrect 

done : name map + prompt pitfalls inherited subgoal checks 

part. : not a new certified graph shallow supports 

part. :stable but not deeper c100 ( .263 ) simplify c47 branch 

done : plain retry + early unknown-lemma rejection source signatures 

done : grep exact declarations inherited checks 

part. : no new node route shallow supports 

part. : high context, lower solve c101 ( .224 ) repair c83 branch 

done :concise retry + reject bad best proofs cached lemma index 

done :forbidden-name list – n/i : 1200s timeout appears shallow repair context 

part. : no structural gain c137 ( .171 ) anti-halluc. repair 

n/i : stricter checks lower solve rate static lemma scan + bad-name rejection 

done :prompt + loop edits 

have -node extraction 

n/i : trace invalid, no isolated node checks shallow supports 

n/i : low solve rate, no depth gain c140 ( .211 ) repair + lint feedback 

done :auto-patch then LLM repair, still weak safe-lemma list / native guard 

part. :prompt-side guard 

have -node extraction 

n/i : trace invalid shallow supports 

part. :inspectable but not deeper c141 ( .250 ) repair decomp. child 

n/i :decomp. route remains weak lemma checker + subgoal prover 

part. :helper tooling integrated subgoal-level verification 

part. :helper checks exist, final assembly weak subgoal tree n/i : many tasks emit no final proof body c143 ⋆

(.276 )c93 repair + structured prompt 

done :lemma checking plus monolithic repair verified lemma feedback 

done :cached name checks in loop proof-context nodes 

part. :nodes logged, not a certified graph shallow decomp. hints 

part. :modest gain over parent c144 ⋆

(.303 )proof-plan prompt + repair 

done : plan guides monolithic repair; best held-out solve rate lemma checker integration 

done :verified-lemma hints + stricter prompt claimed 

have nodes 

n/i : flag set, but no isolated node verification shallow supports 

part. : best score, still no deep DAG c145 ( .211 ) c100 structured context 

done : have -extraction, weak solve rate safe-lemma set + hallu-cination filters 

done :rejects invented names early extract have 

subgoals 

n/i : no node-verif. proof-context DAG 

part. :richer labels, no gain in solve rate c146 ( .158 ) cached-example repair 

n/i : extra machinery lowers solve rate lemma cache + examples 

done : cache wired into workflow lemma / error feedback 

n/i : trace invalid, no node checks shallow supports 

n/i :timeout-prone, only 12/76 

> †

c22’s lemma index invoked subprocess , which the mutable-process guard blocks; the uncaught exception crashed nearly every task, which is why c22 fell to the seed-level score. Its descendant c23 then removed the index and the 

18 decomposition scaffolding in favor of a simpler robust loop. 

# References 

[1] Benjamin S. Bloom. Learning for mastery. Evaluation Comment , 1(2):1–12, 1968. [2] Jonathan C. Brant and Kenneth O. Stanley. Minimal criterion coevolution: A new approach to open-ended search. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference ,pages 67–74, 2017. [3] Guangyao Chen, Siwei Dong, Yu Shu, Ge Zhang, Jaward Sesay, Börje F. Karlsson, Jie Fu, and Yemin Shi. Autoagents: A framework for automatic agent generation. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) , 2024. arXiv:2309.17288. [4] Yixing Chen, Yiding Wang, Siqi Zhu, Haofei Yu, Tao Feng, Muhan Zhang, Mostofa Patwary, and Jiaxuan You. Multi-agent evolve: Llm self-improve through co-evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.23595 , 2025. [5] Jui-Hui Chung, Ziyang Cai, Zihao Li, Qishuo Yin, Rohit Agarwal, Simon Park, Rodrigo Porto, Narutatsu Ri, Ziran Yang, Shange Tang, Xingyu Dang, Hongzhou Lin, Mengdi Wang, Danqi Chen, Chi Jin, Liam H. Fowl, and Sanjeev Arora. Goedel-architect: Streamlining formal theorem proving with blueprint generation and refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.06468 ,2026. [6] Michael Dennis, Natasha Jaques, Eugene Vinitsky, Alexandre Bayen, Stuart Russell, Andrew Critch, and Sergey Levine. Emergent complexity and zero-shot transfer via unsupervised en-vironment design. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. arXiv:2012.02096. [7] Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Banarse, Henryk Michalewski, Simon Osindero, and Tim Rock-täschel. Promptbreeder: Self-referential self-improvement via prompt evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16797 , 2023. [8] Huan-ang Gao, Jiayi Geng, Wenyue Hua, Mengkang Hu, Xinzhe Juan, Hongzhang Liu, Shilong Liu, Jiahao Qiu, Xuan Qi, Yiran Wu, Hongru Wang, Han Xiao, Yuhang Zhou, Shaokun Zhang, Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Yixiong Fang, Qiwen Zhao, Dongrui Liu, Qihan Ren, Cheng Qian, Zhenhailong Wang, Minda Hu, Huazheng Wang, Qingyun Wu, Heng Ji, and Mengdi Wang. A survey of self-evolving agents: What, when, how, and where to evolve on the path to artificial super intelligence. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2026. arXiv:2507.21046. [9] Jiacheng Guo, Ling Yang, Peter Chen, Qixin Xiao, Yinjie Wang, Xinzhe Juan, Jiahao Qiu, Ke Shen, and Mengdi Wang. Genenv: Difficulty-aligned co-evolution between llm agents and environment simulators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.19682 , 2025. [10] Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated design of agentic systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08435 , 2024. [11] Yukun Huang, Leonardo F. R. Ribeiro, Momchil Hardalov, Bhuwan Dhingra, Markus Dreyer, and Venkatesh Saligrama. Deepfact: Co-evolving benchmarks and agents for deep research factuality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.05912 , 2026. Accepted at ACL 2026. 19 [12] Thomas Hubert, Rishi Mehta, Laurent Sartran, Miklós Z. Horváth, Goran Žužić, Eric Wieser, Aja Huang, Julian Schrittwieser, Yannick Schroecker, Hussain Masoom, et al. Olympiad-level formal mathematical reasoning with reinforcement learning. Nature , 651:607–613, 2026. Published online 2025. [13] Alex Iacob, Andrej Jovanović, William F. Shen, Daniel Burkhardt, Meghdad Kurmanji, Nurbek Tastan, Lorenzo Sani, Niccolò Alberto Elia Venanzi, Ambroise Odonnat, Zeyu Cao, Bill Marino, Xinchi Qiu, and Nicholas D. Lane. The red queen gödel machine: Co-evolving agents and their evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.26294 , 2026. [14] Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Sean Welleck, Jin Peng Zhou, Wenda Li, Jiacheng Liu, Mateja Jamnik, Timothée Lacroix, Yuhuai Wu, and Guillaume Lample. Draft, sketch, and prove: Guiding formal theorem provers with informal proofs. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2023. arXiv:2210.12283. [15] Po-Nien Kung, Linfeng Song, Dawsen Hwang, Jinsung Yoon, Chun-Liang Li, Simone Severini, Mirek Olšák, Edward Lockhart, Quoc V. Le, Burak Gokturk, Thang Luong, Tomas Pfister, and Nanyun Peng. Leap: Supercharging llms for formal mathematics with agentic frameworks. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.03303 , 2026. [16] Yong Lin, Shange Tang, Bohan Lyu, Ziran Yang, Jui-Hui Chung, Haoyu Zhao, Lai Jiang, Yihan Geng, Jiawei Ge, Jingruo Sun, Jiayun Wu, Jiri Gesi, Ximing Lu, David Acuna, Kaiyu Yang, Hongzhou Lin, Yejin Choi, Danqi Chen, Sanjeev Arora, and Chi Jin. Goedel-prover-v2: Scaling formal theorem proving with scaffolded data synthesis and self-correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.03613 , 2025. [17] Alexander Novikov, Ngân V˜ u, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, M. Pawan Kumar, Abigail See, Swarat Chaudhuri, George Holland, Alex Davies, Sebastian Nowozin, Pushmeet Kohli, and Matej Balog. Alphaevolve: A coding agent for scien-tific and algorithmic discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131 , 2025. [18] Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever. Generative language modeling for automated theorem prov-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03393 , 2020. [19] Rémy Portelas, Cédric Colas, Lilian Weng, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Auto-matic curriculum learning for deep rl: A short survey. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) , 2020. arXiv:2003.04664. [20] Z. Z. Ren, Zhihong Shao, Junxiao Song, Huajian Xin, Haocheng Wang, Wanjia Zhao, Liyue Zhang, Zhe Fu, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Shirong Ma, Hongxuan Tang, Yuxuan Liu, Wenjun Gao, Daya Guo, and Chong Ruan. Deepseek-prover-v2: Advancing formal mathematical reasoning via reinforcement learning for subgoal decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21801 , 2025. [21] Maxime Robeyns, Martin Szummer, and Laurence Aitchison. A self-improving coding agent. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.15228 , 2025. [22] Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog, M. Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Jordan S. Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi, Pushmeet Kohli, and Alhussein Fawzi. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models. Nature , 625:468–475, 2024. 20 [23] Jürgen Schmidhuber. Gödel machines: Fully self-referential optimal universal self-improvers. In Ben Goertzel and Cassio Pennachin, editors, Artificial General Intelligence , Cognitive Tech-nologies, pages 199–226. Springer, 2007. [24] Yu Shang, Yu Li, Keyu Zhao, Likai Ma, Jiahe Liu, Fengli Xu, and Yong Li. Agentsquare: Automatic llm agent search in modular design space. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. arXiv:2410.06153. [25] Peiyang Song, Kaiyu Yang, and Anima Anandkumar. Lean copilot: Large language models as copilots for theorem proving in lean. In International Conference on Neuro-symbolic Systems (NeuS) , 2025. arXiv:2404.12534. [26] Zhengwei Tao, Ting-En Lin, Xiancai Chen, Hangyu Li, Yuchuan Wu, Yongbin Li, Zhi Jin, Fei Huang, Dacheng Tao, and Jingren Zhou. A survey on self-evolution of large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14387 , 2024. [27] George Tsoukalas, Jasper Lee, John Jennings, Jimmy Xin, Michelle Ding, Michael Jennings, Amitayush Thakur, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Putnambench: Evaluating neural theorem-provers on the putnam mathematical competition. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Datasets and Benchmarks , 2024. arXiv:2407.11214. [28] Lev S. Vygotsky. Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes . Harvard University Press, 1978. Edited by Michael Cole, Vera John-Steiner, Sylvia Scribner, and Ellen Souberman. [29] Rui Wang, Joel Lehman, Jeff Clune, and Kenneth O. Stanley. Paired open-ended trailblazer (poet): Endlessly generating increasingly complex and diverse learning environments and their solutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.01753 , 2019. [30] Kaiyu Yang, Aidan M. Swope, Alex Gu, Rahul Chalamala, Peiyang Song, Shixing Yu, Saad Godil, Ryan Prenger, and Anima Anandkumar. Leandojo: Theorem proving with retrieval-augmented language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Datasets and Benchmarks , 2023. arXiv:2306.15626. [31] Ruiyi Yang, Zechen Li, Hao Xue, Imran Razzak, and Flora D. Salim. Mage: Multi-agent self-evolution with co-evolutionary knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.10064 , 2026. [32] Xunjian Yin, Xinyi Wang, Liangming Pan, Li Lin, Xiaojun Wan, and William Yang Wang. Gödel agent: A self-referential agent framework for recursively self-improvement. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 27890–27913, Vienna, Austria, 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. arXiv:2410.04444. [33] Siyu Yuan, Kaitao Song, Jiangjie Chen, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, and Deqing Yang. Evoagent: Towards automatic multi-agent generation via evolutionary algorithms. In Annual Confer-ence of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) , 2025. arXiv:2406.14228. [34] Eric Zelikman, Eliana Lorch, Lester Mackey, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Self-taught opti-mizer (stop): Recursively self-improving code generation. In Conference on Language Modeling (COLM) , 2024. arXiv:2310.02304. 21 [35] Jenny Zhang, Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, Robert Lange, and Jeff Clune. Darwin gödel machine: Open-ended evolution of self-improving agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22954 , 2025. [36] Jenny Zhang, Bingchen Zhao, Wannan Yang, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, Minqi Jiang, Sam Devlin, and Tatiana Shavrina. Hyperagents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.19461 , 2026. [37] Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Xionghui Chen, Jiaqi Chen, Mingchen Zhuge, Xin Cheng, Sirui Hong, Jinlin Wang, Bingnan Zheng, Bang Liu, Yuyu Luo, and Chenglin Wu. Aflow: Automating agentic workflow generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. arXiv:2410.10762. [38] Kunhao Zheng, Jesse Michael Han, and Stanislas Polu. Minif2f: A cross-system benchmark for formal olympiad-level mathematics. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2022. arXiv:2109.00110. 22