Title: Multi-Turn On-Policy Distillation with Prefix Replay

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.04763v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 03:01:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Multi-Turn On-Policy Distillation with Prefix Replay 

## Baohao Liao ∗† 12 Hanze Dong ∗1 Christof Monz 2 Xinxing Xu 1 Li Dong 1 Furu Wei 11Microsoft Research 2University of Amsterdam 

https://aka.ms/GeneralAI 

Abstract 

We study on-policy distillation (OPD) for agentic tasks, where an LLM agent interacts with an envi-ronment over multiple turns and a student imitates a teacher over these multi-turn interaction histories. Fully online OPD is costly because each update requires fresh student rollouts through the environment and teacher queries at visited histories. We propose Replayed-Prefix On-Policy Distillation (ReOPD), an off-environment alternative that reuses pre-collected teacher trajectories as replayed prefixes: the student acts at selected steps, while the teacher provides dense per-step supervision without executing new environment interactions. We show that multi-turn OPD introduces a prefix trap: making histo-ries more student-on-policy improves relevance to the student, but can query the teacher on histories where its target is unreliable. This creates a two-sided distribution shift between student occupancy and teacher reliability. ReOPD addresses this by treating multi-turn OPD as a reliability-aware prefix distri-bution design and implements it with a simple step-decaying sampling schedule that emphasizes early, lower-shift prefixes. Across mathematical reasoning with Python and search environments over multiple teacher and student model scales, ReOPD preserves or improves OPD-level accuracy, uses zero tool calls during student training, and is at least 4 × faster per training step than OPD. ReOPD therefore turns expensive agent-environment interaction into a reusable offline resource, enabling scalable distillation across tools, tasks, and environments. Math with Python Search     

> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50
> 55
> Accuracy (%)
> 45.0
> 51.0
> 53.7
> 32.1
> 39.1 39.0
> Math with Python Search
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> 125
> 150
> 175
> Time (s) for rollout / step
> 4.2×
> 9.1×
> 169
> 64
> 40
> 7
> Math with Python Search
> 0.0
> 2.5
> 5.0
> 7.5
> 10.0
> 12.5
> 15.0
> #Tool calls / trajectory
> 00
> SFT
> OPD
> ReOPD

Figure 1: ReOPD keeps the benefits of on-policy distillation while removing environment in-teraction. ReOPD matches or improves OPD accuracy, but trains much faster per step and eliminates tool calls during training by replaying teacher-recorded prefixes instead of executing fresh environment rollouts. The student/teacher models are Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 and Qwen3-8B, respectively. 

> ∗

Equal Contribution. 

> †

Work done during an internship at Microsoft. 

1

> arXiv:2607.04763v1 [cs.LG] 6 Jul 2026

𝑎 !

𝑜 !

𝑎 "𝑜 " 𝑜 # 𝑎 # …

𝑎 $" 𝑎 $# … 𝑎 $$

> 1

Student rollout 

(online) 

Teacher queried OPD update 

𝝎 𝒕 

> Uniform weights
> All steps weighted equally

𝑜 !

𝑎 ! 

> 𝑜 !

…𝑎 !

𝑎 $𝑜 $        

> 𝑜 "𝑎 "𝑜 #𝑎 #
> 𝑜 !𝑎 !𝑜 "𝑎 "𝑜 #𝑎 #

…     

> 𝑜 !𝑎 !𝑜 "𝑎 "𝑜 #𝑎 #

…

> …

𝑎 "𝑜 " 𝑜 # 𝑎 # … 𝑜 ! 𝑎 ! 𝑎 ! … 𝑜 $ 𝑎 $

𝑎 $!

𝝎 𝒕 

> Step -decaying weights
> Strong
> (earlier steps)
> Weak
> (later steps)

Teacher rollout 

(once or during RL) 

Offline prefix replay Reliability -aware weighting                         

> teacher
> agent
> Environment
> (always alive)
> teacher
> action
> observation targets for student’s actions
> student agent
> teacher agent environment
> student
> action
> offline
> trajectory pool
> sample one
> replay prefix up to step 𝑡
> future steps
> (not used)
> student
> agent
> acts at
> step 𝑡
> target for step 𝑡
> 𝑎 $𝑎 $𝑎 %$student action teacher action target from teacher for student’s action
> teacher
> agent
> 2⋯𝑡 ⋯𝑇 −1𝑇
> 12⋯𝑡 ⋯𝑇 −1𝑇
> No env during
> training
> Turn :
> Turn :

Figure 2: Comparison between OPD and ReOPD for agentic tasks . Up: OPD with online environ-ment. The environment is always alive during training. And all steps equally contribute to the loss. Down: 

ReOPD with offline environment. The environment is only alive for collecting the teacher’s trajectories, which can happen during the training of the teacher agent by using RL, like GRPO. Afterwards, the envi-ronment is not needed for the training of the student agent. The earlier steps contribute more to the loss. 

# 1 Introduction 

Reinforcement learning (RL) has become a central tool for eliciting strong reasoning and agentic behavior from large language models (LLMs). Policy-gradient methods such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) and GRPO (Shao et al., 2024), together with verifiable rewards, drive much of the recent progress on mathemat-ical reasoning and tool use (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2025). A defining property of RL is that it is on-policy : the model is trained on trajectories sampled from itself, so it learns to recover from its own mistakes rather than from mistakes made by some other distribution. However, RL supervision is sparse: a scalar reward conveys only a few bits per episode, regardless of how many tokens were generated (Thinking Machines Lab, 2025), which makes it sample-inefficient, particularly for small models. Knowledge distillation offers a much denser learning signal by training a student to imitate a stronger teacher (Hinton et al., 2015; Kim and Rush, 2016). The standard recipe is off-policy : the student is su-pervised on teacher-generated trajectories via sequence-level distillation or supervised fine-tuning. While data-efficient, off-policy distillation trains the student on prefixes visited by the teacher , not by the student itself. When the student later makes an early mistake the teacher would not, it drifts into prefixes never seen during training, and errors compound over the sequence (Ross et al., 2011; Ranzato et al., 2016). On-policy distillation (OPD) addresses this by sampling prefixes from the student while still distilling against the teacher’s per-token distribution (Gu et al., 2024; Agarwal et al., 2024; Thinking Machines Lab, 2025), combining the relevance of on-policy data with the density of teacher supervision. These ideas were largely developed for single-turn generation. Modern LLMs, however, increasingly tackle 

agentic tasks , operating as agents that interact with external environments over multiple turns, interleaving actions such as code execution, retrieval, or search engine calls with the environment feedback (Yao et al., 2022; Schick et al., 2023; Nakano et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2025). Coupling this multi-turn structure with teacher distillation gives multi-turn OPD : at each turn, the student rolls into a history, and the teacher supplies an improvement target. Realized online, this is expensive – every update must roll the student through 2Math + 

> Python
> Search / QA
> Browser /
> Tool Use
> Code / API

… 

> 𝑎 !𝑜 !

… 𝑎 "𝑜 "   

> 𝑎 !𝑜 !𝑎 "𝑜 "
> 𝑎 !𝑜 !𝑎 "𝑜 "
> 𝑎 !𝑜 !𝑎 "𝑜 "

…

…

…            

> 𝑎 $!𝑎 $#…𝑎 $"
> 𝑎 $!𝑎 $#…𝑎 $"
> 𝑎 $!𝑎 $#…𝑎 $"
> 𝑎 $!𝑎 $#…𝑎 $"
> Math +
> Python
> Search / QA
> Browser /
> Tool Use
> Code / API

… 

> 𝑜 !

…𝑎 ! 𝑜 " 𝑎 " 

> 𝑜 !

…𝑎 ! 𝑜 " 𝑎 " 

> 𝑜 !

…𝑎 ! 𝑜 " 𝑎 " 

> 𝑜 !

…𝑎 ! 𝑜 " 𝑎 "

> Unified
> offline
> prefix
> trajectory
> pool

… … … 

> Needs online rollout for every environment
> Complexity grows with number of environments
> Collect once, train offline
> No online environment calls during training
> One unified replay pipeline across environments
> student
> agent
> teacher agent 1
> teacher agent 2
> teacher agent 3
> teacher agent N
> online
> interaction
> heterogeneous
> environments

… …

> teacher agent 1
> teacher agent 2
> teacher agent 3
> teacher agent N
> student
> agent

Figure 3: Training a shared student agent on multiple heterogeneous environments with OPD and ReOPD. Left: With an increasing number of environments, the operational complexity grows for OPD due to the heavy deployment of the environments. Right: ReOPD doesn’t require the deployment of all environments at the same time. The teacher’s trajectories can be collected separately for different environments, and then be merged into a unified pool for the later training of the student agent without any online environment. the environment and query the teacher afresh at each visited history, incurring environment-interaction and teacher-inference cost at every step. A far more efficient alternative – prefix replay – reuses trajectories the teacher has already produced (Figure 2): the student is rolled in on a teacher-recorded prefix and generates its own action at the evaluated step, the prefix and its observations are taken from the trace instead of executing actions, and the teacher supplies the per-step target. The student thus stays on-policy at the supervised step – but not along the teacher-forced prefix itself – while the environment is never queried; ReOPD therefore trades a fully on-policy roll-in for reusability, a tension we make precise as a two-sided distribution shift in Section 3. Crucially, such trajectories are not an added cost: when the teacher is itself trained with RL, its on-policy rollouts are already collected during training, so the prefix pool comes for free and distillation requires no extra environment interaction. This decoupling compounds when a single student must learn from several heterogeneous environments: instead of deploying all of them simultaneously, ReOPD collects each teacher’s trajectories separately and merges them into one offline pool for student training (Figure 3). Figure 1 illustrates the payoff: ReOPD retains the accuracy benefits of OPD while sharply reducing per-step training time and tool calls. This motivates the question we study: How should multi-turn OPD be done when the environment is replaced by replayed teacher prefixes rather than fresh online rollouts? In this setting, prefixes act as implicit states and multi-turn generation induces an implicit trajectory distribution over them. Training offline in this way does not remove the temporal structure of multi-turn learning, and we identify a prefix trap with two layers. The first is temporal : prefix errors compound across steps, so the problem stays sequential. The second is distributional – a two-sided shift : Making prefixes fully student-on-policy keeps them relevant to the student (a student occupancy shift) but can query the teacher where its condition is no longer a trustworthy target (a teacher reliability shift). A simple decomposition bounds the gap to an ideal interactive objective by exactly these two terms. Multi-turn OPD is therefore not just “make distillation on-policy” but reliability-aware prefix distribution design : choosing, at each step, an effective prefix distribution between student and teacher occupancies; a concrete sampling or weighting schedule is an implementation. This view predicts a regime-aware outcome that our experiments confirm: OPD is already strong when 3the teacher stays reliable on student-induced histories, whereas leaning on teacher trajectories and down-weighting high-shift late steps wins when the teacher–student gap is large, even though it is less on-policy. 

Contributions. Our contributions are as follows. 

• We study efficient Replayed-Prefix On-Policy Distillation that reuses a fixed pool of offline teacher trajectories, and surface the prefix trap , separating its temporal (compounding-error) and distributional (two-sided shift) layers. 

• We formulate multi-turn OPD as a two-sided distribution-shift problem and derive a bound that decom-poses the objective gap into a student occupancy-mismatch term and a teacher reliability term, showing why fully student-on-policy distillation is not automatically optimal. 

• We recast multi-turn OPD as a reliability-aware prefix distribution design, with a geometric bridge between student and teacher occupancies, and show that a simple step-decay schedule – applied by sampling prefixes – is a practical implementation of the resulting effective distribution. 

• We validate the resulting method, Replayed-Prefix On-Policy Distillation (ReOPD), on mathematical reasoning and search environments, across single- and multi-environment settings and teacher and student models of varying scale. ReOPD improves over off-policy distillation (SFT) where reported; relative to strong on-policy OPD, and consistent with our two-regime analysis, it improves on mathematical reasoning when the teacher-student gap is wide and essentially matches OPD when the teacher is already reliable on the student histories (search/QA). 

# 2 Related Work 

Knowledge distillation for language models. Knowledge distillation transfers a teacher’s behavior into a smaller student (Hinton et al., 2015), and sequence-level distillation extends this idea to autoregres-sive generation by training on teacher trajectories (Kim and Rush, 2016). It underlies many strong small instructions and reasoning models trained from teacher-written solutions or rationales (Mitra et al., 2024; Yue et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023; Hsieh et al., 2023). The standard recipe is efficient but off-policy: the student learns from the teacher prefixes, then must recover from its own prefixes at inference. On-policy distillation addresses this by querying the teacher on student-sampled prefixes: MiniLLM uses reverse KL (Gu et al., 2024), GKD mixes student and teacher generations (Agarwal et al., 2024), DistiLLM refines the divergence and replay design (Ko et al., 2024, 2025), speculative distillation interleaves teacher and student tokens (Xu et al., 2025a), and recent practice frames OPD as dense supervision compared with sparse RL (Thinking Ma-chines Lab, 2025). Recent extensions study black-box OPD and on-policy context distillation (Ye et al., 2025, 2026b). By analogy, a stronger teacher is not always a better teacher (Xu et al., 2024); there the concern is teacher and data selection for single-turn instruction tuning, whereas our reliability notion concerns where 

the teacher’s per-step conditional is queried, so we take it as a suggestive parallel rather than direct support. We extend this line from single-turn generation to multi-turn training from a fixed teacher-trajectory pool, where the key object is not only the teacher target but the prefix distribution on which it is queried. 

RL algorithms for LLM post-training. RL post-training optimizes scalar feedback rather than teacher conditionals. RLHF fits preference rewards, often Bradley–Terry models (Bradley and Terry, 1952), and optimizes them with PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), as in instruction-following and helpful-harmless assis-tants (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022). Direct preference objectives simplify this pipeline by replacing online reward optimization with contrastive or implicit-reward losses such as SLIC-HF (Zhao et al., 2023), DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023), IPO (Azar et al., 2023), and GPO (Tang et al., 2024), with iterative and on-line variants studied under KL-regularized preference learning (Xiong et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2024). For reasoning, o1/DeepSeek-R1-style systems increasingly use verifiable or process rewards (Jaech et al., 2024; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024), giving rise to scalable methods such as GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) and DAPO (Yu et al., 2025). Critic-free variants revisit REINFORCE (Williams, 41992), including ReMax (Li et al., 2023), RLOO-style baselines (Ahmadian et al., 2024; Kool et al., 2019), and Reinforce-Rej (Xiong et al., 2025); RAFT and rejection sampling are the binary-reward limit, where successful trajectories are selected and imitated (Dong et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2025). ReOPD is orthogonal to this optimizer family: it keeps dense teacher supervision and asks which replayed prefixes make that supervision reliable. 

Reasoning and agentic LLMs. RL-style post-training also extends to agents that interact with tools and environments (Yao et al., 2022; Schick et al., 2023; Nakano et al., 2021), including search-augmented agents (Jin et al., 2025) and tool-integrated mathematical reasoning (Gou et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024). Other work improves reasoning through self-hinting (Liao et al., 2026), budget-aware elastic reasoning (Xu et al., 2025b), online experiential learning (Ye et al., 2026a), or distills teacher-generated reasoning-and-acting traces into smaller agents (Chen et al., 2023, 2024). These works motivate our setting but optimize different signals: scalar rewards, advantages, filtered rollouts, or fixed teacher trajectories. We retain the dense conditional target of distillation while avoiding live environment interaction, so the central design variable becomes which replayed prefixes should carry training mass. 

Self-training and rejection sampling. Self-training methods repeatedly turn model samples into new training data. Expert-iteration methods imitate successful search or sampling solutions (Anthony et al., 2017), STaR bootstraps from self-generated rationales (Zelikman et al., 2022), and ReST-style methods alternate generation, scalar-feedback filtering, and retraining (Gulcehre et al., 2023; Singh et al., 2023). In LLM post-training, rejection sampling and RAFT instantiate the same principle by imitating reward-ranked trajectories (Dong et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2025), with refinements for variance, curricula, and agentic self-improvement (Yao et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2024; Aksitov et al., 2023); reflective methods revise trajectories from feedback (Shinn et al., 2024). ReOPD also reuses offline traces, but the trace is not merely accepted or rejected: it becomes a site where a teacher’s condition is queried, so the effective prefix distribution is the core variable. 

Distribution shift and compounding errors. The prefix trap inherits the classic sequential-learning problem: behavior cloning on expert states suffers covariate shift once the learner deviates, which DAgger addresses by training on the learner’s induced state distribution (Ross et al., 2011). Autoregressive generation has the same exposure-bias structure; scheduled sampling, sequence-level training, and Professor Forcing reduce the mismatch between teacher-forced training and free-running inference (Bengio et al., 2015; Ranzato et al., 2016; Lamb et al., 2016). LLM alignment revisits this tension at scale: on-policy, even suboptimal, samples can help preference fine-tuning (Tajwar et al., 2024), but on-policy data is not uniformly best and depends on the alignment stage (Sun et al., 2025). Recent reasoning distillation similarly identifies a dual exposure bias: teacher-forced traces mismatch student inference, while fully student-generated contexts can make teacher intervention unreliable (Wang et al., 2026). Our formulation makes this duality explicit as a two-sided shift: student relevance pulls prefixes toward the learner, while teacher reliability pulls them back toward the teacher-supported region. 

# 3 Problem Formulation and Analysis 

We formulate multi-turn on-policy distillation in an interactive environment. At each OPD update, let 

πθold denote the current student policy used for data collection, and let πθ denote the student policy being optimized. For each input x ∼ D , the agent interacts with an environment over T decision steps. At interaction step t, the agent observes an interaction history Ht = ( O1, A 1, O 2, A 2, . . . , A t−1, O t), where 

Ot is the current observation and As is the action taken at step s. Given Ht, a policy π chooses an action 

At ∼ π(· | x, H t), and the environment returns the next observation Ot+1 ∼ E (· | x, H t, A t). Thus a step is an interaction step consisting of a policy action followed by an environment response, rather than merely a token-generation step. 5For any policy π, the policy-environment system induces a step-t history occupancy distribution dtπ, E (ht |

x) = Pr π, E (Ht = ht | x), which factorizes recursively: if ht+1 = ( ht, a t, o t+1 ), then 

dt+1  

> π, E

(ht+1 | x) = dtπ, E (ht | x) π(at | x, h t) E(ot+1 | x, h t, a t).

In particular, the current student πθold induces the student interaction occupancy dtθold ≡ dtπθold ,E , while the teacher πT induces the teacher interaction occupancy dtT ≡ dtπT ,E . Once a history ht is collected, the teacher is queried for a target action distribution πT (· | x, h t). Therefore, in interactive OPD the design choice is not only which target distribution to distill from, but also which interaction histories to query the teacher on. 

Ideal interactive improvement objective. Let q⋆t (· | x, h t) denote the ideal improvement target at interaction step t and history ( x, h t). The ideal objective evaluates the updated student πθ on histories that the current student πθold will actually encounter under the environment interaction: 

R⋆(θ; θold ) = Ex∼D 

" TX

> t=1

αt EHt∼dtθold (·| x) [ℓ (πθ (· | x, H t), q ⋆t (· | x, H t))] 

#

, (1) where αt ≥ 0 controls the relative importance of different interaction steps; unless a schedule is specified we take αt ≡ 1 (uniform across steps), so that ReOPD’s reliability signal – including its step-decay – is carried entirely by the weight wt (Section 4), not by αt. This objective captures student relevance: the student should improve on histories generated by its own interaction with the environment. In practice, q⋆t is unavailable. OPD therefore replaces it with the teacher distribution πT (· | x, h t). However, the teacher is now queried on histories generated by a particular roll-in process. If those histories are far from the teacher’s reliable interaction support, the teacher’s action distribution may not be a trustworthy improvement signal. 

From online interaction to offline reuse. The occupancies dtπ, E and the ideal objective R⋆ are defined through environment interaction, but they serve only as conceptual targets . Realizing them online would require, at every update, rolling the current student through the environment and querying the teacher afresh at each visited history – precisely the per-step environment and teacher cost we wish to avoid. We instead train off-environment from a fixed pool of pre-collected teacher trajectories: at each recorded history 

ht the student proposes an action and the teacher conditional πT (· | x, h t) supplies the target, while no environment query is needed because the prefix and observations are replayed from the trace. Consequently the roll-in is the teacher pool, so the collected histories follow Pt ≈ dtT rather than the student occupancy 

dtθold . The student occupancy that the ideal objective targets is therefore never sampled ; obtaining it is exactly what online interaction would buy. This is the crux of the offline setting: we must approximate an objective defined over dtθold using only samples from dtT , which is what the reweighting below accomplishes. 

Collected and effective history distributions. Write Pt(· | x) for the roll-in distribution histories are collected from; in the offline setting it is the fixed teacher pool, so Pt ≈ dtT . A general weighted OPD objective is 

LP,w (θ; θold ) = Ex∼D 

" TX

> t=1

αt EHt∼P t(·| x) [wt(x, H t) ℓ (πθ (· | x, H t), π T (· | x, H t))] 

#

, (2) where the weights are normalized per ( x, t ), i.e. EHt∼P t(·| x)[wt(x, H t)] = 1, so that wt reshapes Pt into the per-step distribution ρt; the position-only schedule of Section 4, constant across histories at each t, is instead normalized across positions, as detailed there. Then wt induces an effective interaction-prefix distribution 

ρt(ht | x) = wt(x, h t) Pt(ht | x), and the objective becomes 

Lρ(θ; θold ) = Ex∼D 

" TX

> t=1

αt EHt∼ρt(·| x) [ℓ (πθ (· | x, H t), π T (· | x, H t))] 

#

. (3) 6Thus the central design problem is not the raw weight wt, but the effective history distribution ρt.

Two sources of mismatch. The practical objective differs from the ideal interactive improvement ob-jective for two reasons. First, the effective history distribution ρt may differ from the student-environment occupancy dtθold . Second, even when histories are relevant to the student, the teacher may be unreliable on histories far from its own interaction support. Define the step-wise teacher reliability error 

ϵθT,t (x, h t) = |ℓ (πθ (· | x, h t), q ⋆t (· | x, h t)) − ℓ (πθ (· | x, h t), π T (· | x, h t)) | .

Assumption 1 (Bounded improvement loss) . The loss against the ideal target is uniformly bounded: there exists a constant B < ∞ such that ℓ (πθ (· | x, h t), q ⋆t (· | x, h t)) ≤ B for all (x, h t, t ).

Assumption 1 is mild and covers the losses we use. It holds automatically for any bounded divergence – e.g. total variation ( B = 1) or Jensen–Shannon ( B = log 2). For the per-token KL used in Section 4, it holds whenever the target conditional is bounded below on its support, q⋆t (a | x, h t) ≥ pmin > 0, since then DKL (πθ ∥ q⋆t ) ≤ log(1 /p min ) =: B; a softmax with bounded logits (equivalently a temperature or label-smoothing floor) guarantees such a pmin . Only the ideal-target loss needs to be bounded: the teacher-target loss enters the bound solely through the difference ϵθT,t .

Proposition 1 (Two-sided decomposition) . Recall the ideal objective R⋆(θ; θold ) (1), which scores πθ against the ideal target q⋆t on the student occupancy dtθold , and the replayed objective Lρ(θ; θold ) (3), which scores πθ

against the teacher πT on the effective prefix distribution ρt = wt Pt. Under Assumption 1 (with bound B), 

|R ⋆(θ; θold ) − L ρ(θ; θold )| ≤ Ex∼D 

" TX

> t=1

αt

2B TV  dtθold (· | x), ρ t(· | x) + EHt∼ρt(·| x)

ϵθT,t (x, H t) #

. (4) 

Here TV is the total-variation distance, αt ≥ 0 the step coefficients of (1), and ϵθT,t (x, h t) = ℓ(πθ , q ⋆t ) −

ℓ(πθ , π T ) the step-wise teacher-reliability error, the gap between the ideal- and teacher-target losses at (x, h t).Proof. Fix x and t, and abbreviate the ideal-target and teacher-target losses by ft(h) = ℓ(πθ (· | x, h ), q ⋆t (· | 

x, h )) and gt(h) = ℓ(πθ (· | x, h ), π T (· | x, h )), so that R⋆ = Ex

P  

> t

αt Edtθold 

[ft] and Lρ = Ex

P  

> t

αt Eρt [gt].Adding and subtracting Eρt [ft], 

Edtθold 

[ft] − Eρt [gt] =  Edtθold 

[ft] − Eρt [ft]| {z }

> occupancy shift

+  Eρt [ft] − Eρt [gt]| {z }

> teacher reliability

.

For the occupancy-shift term, Assumption 1 gives ∥ft∥∞ ≤ B, and since P 

> h

dtθold (h | x) − ρt(h | x) =2 TV( dtθold , ρ t), 

Edtθold 

[ft] − Eρt [ft] ≤ ∥ ft∥∞

X

> h

dtθold (h | x) − ρt(h | x) ≤ 2B TV  dtθold (· | x), ρ t(· | x).

For the teacher-reliability term, Jensen’s inequality and the definition of ϵθT,t give Eρt [ft − gt] ≤ Eρt [|ft −

gt|] = Eρt [ϵθT,t ]. Applying the triangle inequality, multiplying by αt ≥ 0, summing over t, and taking Ex∼D 

establishes (4). The first term is the student interaction-occupancy mismatch: it is small when the effective training histories match the histories that the current student will encounter through environment interaction. The second term is the teacher reliability mismatch: it is small when the teacher is queried on histories where its action distribution is a reliable proxy for the ideal improvement target. Fully student-on-policy OPD ( ρt = dtθold for all t) zeroes the occupancy term but not the reliability one: student-generated actions can steer the environment into histories unlikely under the teacher’s own 7interaction process, especially at later steps where its conditional is a poorly calibrated target. Teacher-forced histories ( ρt = dtT ) do the reverse – reliable near the teacher’s own occupancy, but not where the student actually goes at test time. Neither extreme is uniformly optimal, so the effective distribution should balance student relevance against teacher reliability. 

Reliability-aware interaction-prefix distribution. The preceding decomposition motivates choosing, for each interaction step, an effective history distribution 

ρ⋆t ∈ arg min 

> ρt

λstu ,t D  ρt(· | x), d tθold (· | x) + λtea ,t ET (ρt; x) ,

where D measures mismatch to the current student’s occupancy and ET (ρt; x) measures expected teacher unreliability under ρt. Since the true reliability error is generally unobserved, we use teacher support as a practical surrogate, giving the bridge objective 

ρ⋆t ∈ arg min 

> ρt

λstu ,t DKL 

 ρt(· | x) ∥ dtθold (· | x) + λtea ,t DKL 

 ρt(· | x) ∥ dtT (· | x) . (5) When the supports overlap, the solution is the geometric bridge 

ρ⋆t (ht | x) ∝ dtθold (ht | x)γt dtT (ht | x)1−γt

, γt = λstu ,t 

λstu ,t + λtea ,t 

. (6) When γt = 1 the bridge becomes fully student-on-policy; when γt = 0 it becomes teacher-supported roll-in. Intermediate values select histories that are both likely under the current student’s environment interaction and not too far from the teacher’s reliable interaction support. 

Two regimes. The bound (4) sums two competing terms: the occupancy term is minimized by γt → 1 (fully student-on-policy) and the reliability term by γt → 0 (teacher-supported roll-in), so which one dominates sets the right γt. Crucially the balance is per step : the teacher-reliability term grows with depth, as roll-ins drift into histories the teacher rarely visits, so the ideal γt decreases along the trajectory – student-relevant ( γt → 1) at early steps, teacher-supported ( γt → 0) only at the deep steps where the teacher signal has degraded. This yields two regimes. When the teacher stays reliable on student-induced histories – a capable teacher close to the student, short horizons, or early steps – the occupancy term dominates, γt → 1 is best, and ordinary student-on-policy OPD is already strong. When the teacher’s signal degrades off its own support – a large teacher–student gap, long horizons, or later steps – lowering γt at those steps reduces the gap even though the resulting histories are less student-on-policy, which is counterintuitive if one reads OPD as merely “make it on-policy”. Section 4 approximates this depth-dependent retreat without tuning γt directly – shifting supervision mass toward earlier steps rather than reshaping the roll-in within each step – applying on the fixed teacher-pool roll-in a step-decay whose steepness grows with the teacher–student gap. 

From distribution to weight. When histories come from Pt, any effective distribution ρ⋆t is realized by the normalized importance weight w⋆t = ρ⋆t /Pt (with EHt∼P t [w⋆t ] = 1), which recovers the weighted objective (2) and can be applied equivalently by reweighting or by sampling prefixes in proportion to it. The weight is thus an implementation device, not the conceptual core: the principle is to choose, at each step, an effective history distribution that balances student relevance and teacher reliability. Because exact density ratios are high-variance, the concrete step-decay schedule we use in practice is developed in Section 4. After optimizing the weighted objective the student is refreshed, θnew ← arg min θ Lρ(θ; θold ), and the next OPD iteration sets θold ← θnew .

Interpretation. On-policy distillation is not automatically optimal merely because histories are sampled from the student: the history distribution sets both where the student is trained and where the teacher is asked to supervise, so when the teacher is unreliable on student-induced histories a reliability-aware distribution close to both occupancies is the safer target. 84 Replayed-Prefix On-Policy Distillation 

We now turn the principle of the previous section into a concrete algorithm, Replayed-Prefix On-Policy Distillation (ReOPD), realized off-environment from a fixed pool of teacher trajectories. The analysis reduces multi-turn OPD to a single design choice: at each step, pick an effective prefix distribution ρt that balances student relevance against teacher reliability. ReOPD realizes this with two ingredients: 1. Teacher-forced prefix, student action, teacher supervision. For a supervised step t, the prefix 

ht = ( O1, A 1, . . . , O t) is taken entirely from a pre-collected teacher trajectory – every earlier action and every observation is the teacher’s recorded one. At this prefix the student produces its own action, and the teacher’s recorded conditional πT (· | x, h t) supplies the distillation target. Sweeping t over the trajectory covers all positions. Because observations are always replayed, no environment is ever queried. 2. Reliability-aware step schedule. The student is on-policy only at the evaluated step, on top of a teacher-forced prefix. As the position moves deeper into the trajectory, the replayed teacher prefix becomes a higher-shift surrogate for the histories the student would have reached. A per-step schedule therefore emphasizes early, low-shift positions and de-emphasizes late, high-shift positions while keeping the teacher conditional as the distillation target. The key point is that on-policy supervision and off-environment training coexist: the student’s step-t

action makes the target relevant to the student, while the fully teacher-forced prefix keeps the roll-in within the teacher’s occupancy ( Pt ≈ dtT ) and removes any environment interaction. The step schedule then controls how these teacher-supported histories stand in for the student occupancy dtθold .

Inputs and notation. We are given a teacher πT and a pool DT = {(x, h )} of trajectories generated by the teacher interacting with the environment, where each h records the full interaction history including the environment observations. In practice this pool requires no dedicated collection: when the teacher is trained with on-policy RL, its training rollouts are exactly such trajectories, so DT is a free by-product reused for distillation. 

Off-environment prefix construction. For each supervised step t, the prefix ht = ( O1, A 1, . . . , O t) is replayed verbatim from the teacher trace – all earlier actions A<t and all observations O≤t are the teacher’s. The student only acts at step t, where it generates its own action At = ( a1 

> t

, . . . , a nt 

> t

) ∼ πθold (· | x, h t)autoregressively and is supervised, per generated token , by the teacher’s conditional along that action, πT (· | 

x, h t, a <j t ). Because the supervised token contexts a<j t are the student’s own samples, the evaluated step is genuinely on-policy even though the prefix is teacher-forced, and it enters the loss below through these on-policy contexts. No action is ever executed against the environment and no observation is ever generated, so no environment is queried. The roll-in is thus the teacher occupancy, Pt ≈ dtT ; the two-sided shift arises because these replayed prefixes are only a surrogate for the histories the current student would reach, a mismatch that grows with depth and that the weight below corrects by emphasizing the shared, low-shift portion of the trajectory. 

From the bridge to a step-decaying weight. The bridge weight reshapes the collected roll-in Pt ≈ dtT

toward ρ⋆t . Substituting the bridge (6) gives a weight that is a power of the student-to-teacher occupancy ratio, 

wt(x, h t) ∝ ρ⋆t (ht | x)

Pt(ht | x) =

 dtθold (ht | x)

dtT (ht | x)

γt

.

Because the prefix ht is teacher-recorded and both policies act on the same prefix, the environment factors cancel and only the model-induced part remains, an accumulated student-to-teacher likelihood ratio over the prefix, 

brt(x, h t) = Y

> s<t

πθold (as | x, h s)

πT (as | x, h s) .

90.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

Normalized step index t

> 0.41
> 0.40
> 0.39
> 0.38
> 0.37
> 0.36
> log  rt

Figure 4: Step index is a strong proxy for the likelihood-ratio weight. For each supervised position we compute the per-position weight brt = Q 

> s<t

πθold (as)/π T (as) – the student-to-teacher likelihood ratio along the teacher prefix – and plot it against the step index t. The empirical weight decays with depth, because each factor compares the student’s and teacher’s probability of the teacher’s own recorded action and is typically below one, so the product shrinks as the prefix lengthens. This makes step index a cheap proxy for the expensive prefix-level ratio and motivates replacing the explicit ratio with the one-parameter step-decay schedule ω(t) = κt introduced below. This ratio is a genuine per-history quantity – it varies across the histories at a fixed step t – so the weight that realizes the bridge inside the weighted objective (2) is its per-( x, t )-normalized power 

wt(x, h t) = brt(x, h t) γt

EHt∼P t(·| x)[brt(x, H t) γt ] , EHt∼P t [wt] = 1 , (7) which reshapes the pooled roll-in into the effective per-step distribution ρt = wt Pt exactly as the general framework prescribes, upweighting the histories the current student is relatively more likely to have produced. Because brt varies within a step this normalization is non-vacuous, so Eq. (7) is ReOPD’s exact, density-ratio realization of the bridge; it is computable from the student and teacher log-probabilities on the recorded prefix, at the price of a high-variance per-history ratio. Each factor compares the student’s and the teacher’s probability of the teacher’s own recorded action 

as: since the teacher selected as, the ratio πθold (as)/π T (as) is typically below one, so the product shrinks 

as the prefix lengthens. Equivalently, log brt is a cumulative sum that becomes more negative with depth: the further the supervised position sits in the trajectory, the less likely the current student would have followed the same teacher prefix, and the larger the surrogate mismatch between the pooled prefix and the student-relevant history distribution. In other words, the reliability weight is, to first order, a monotone 

step-decaying function of the position index. This holds empirically, not just to first order: measured directly along teacher prefixes, brt is tightly organized by step index (Figure 4), so depth explains most of its variation and justifies the design choice we make next – replacing the expensive, high-variance per-prefix ratio with a stable depth-based proxy. Concretely, the surrogate keeps the monotone-decreasing shape of the exact weight (7) while dropping the noisy per-history factor brt; both the shape and the right steepness follow from the exact weight itself. Writing the average per-step teacher–student gap along the prefix as ¯c(x) = Eas∼πT



log πT (as | x, h s)

πθold (as | x, h s)



≥ 0 (an average per-step DKL (πT ∥ πθold )) ,

we have log brt ≈ − (t − 1) ¯ c, so the exact weight’s depth profile is geometric: 

br γt 

> t

≈ κ t (up to a constant) , κ = exp( −γt ¯c) ∈ (0 , 1] . (8) 10 This is the bridge-to-schedule map: the decay base κ is not a free prefactor but is pinned by the bridge exponent γt (how far ρt is pushed toward the student occupancy) and the per-step gap ¯ c (how fast the teacher pool diverges from the student with depth), and shrinks – steeper decay – when either grows. Collapsing the profile to a single base κ treats the per-step gap as approximately stationary across positions; when it instead grows with depth, κt is a first-order (geometric-mean) approximation to the true accumulated ratio, which Figure 4 shows already tracks the measured decay well. ReOPD therefore uses the one-parameter schedule 

ω(t; κ) = κ t (or any monotone decreasing schedule) ,

with κ ∈ (0 , 1] the single steepness knob; the overall scale cancels under normalization, so – unlike a raw power law – there is no separate prefactor, and in particular no scale symbol to collide with the bridge exponent γt. This is the surrogate’s reliability weight, wt = ω(t; κ) = κ t. Because it depends only on the position index it is constant across the histories at a fixed t, so it is normalized over the horizon – across positions, in proportion to κ t – rather than per-( x, t ); a per-( x, t ) normalization would send a step-constant weight to wt ≡ 1 and erase the decay. This makes the trade-off between the two forms explicit: both feed the same weighted objective (2) through the effective distribution ρt ∝ wt Pt, but the exact weight (7) varies 

within each step (per-( x, t ) normalization – a genuine density ratio that reshapes histories at a fixed t), whereas the step-decay surrogate varies across steps (horizon normalization – constant within a step) and so reallocates mass toward the early, low-shift positions. They differ only in the axis along which wt carries the reliability signal. The surrogate trades exactness for a single interpretable knob: κ = 1 recovers uniform weighting across positions (no decay), and smaller κ concentrates supervision on the early, more reliable steps. Both forms point the same way, since brt decays with depth; the surrogate is the default we sweep in Section 5, realized by sampling positions in proportion to it (equivalently, as a loss weight), as detailed next. More generally the weight can be made data-dependent – e.g. derived from the student’s own sampling probabilities at the evaluated step. 

Weighted distillation objective. At each supervised step the student samples its own action At =(a1 

> t

, . . . , a nt 

> t

) ∼ πθold (· | x, H t) and is distilled against the teacher along that action : the per-step loss is the token-level KL accumulated over the student-sampled action tokens, 

ℓ πθ , π T ; x, H t, A t

 =

> nt

X

> j=1

DKL 



πθ (· | x, H t, a <j t ) πT (· | x, H t, a <j t )



,

whose conditioning contexts a<j t are on-policy, so the loss depends on the student’s action. The student then minimizes the reweighted step-wise objective 

L(θ) = Ex∼D 

" TX

> t=1

αt EHt∼P t(·| x) EAt∼πθold (·| x,H t)

h

wt ℓ πθ , π T ; x, H t, A t

i#

.

Here αt is the uniform base of Section 3 and the reliability signal is carried entirely by wt: the exact weight sets wt by Eq. (7) (per-( x, t )-normalized), while the step-decay surrogate sets wt = ω(t; κ) = κt (horizon-normalized). The effective per-position mass is then αt wt Pt ∝ wt Pt, which the next paragraph draws from directly. After optimization the student is refreshed, θold ← θ, and the next iteration re-evaluates the student’s steps against the same teacher prefixes, so supervision tracks the moving student while staying anchored to the teacher pool. 

From the objective to sampling. The design target is a distribution , not a weight: objective (3) is the plain (unweighted) loss in expectation under ρ⋆t . Any unbiased Monte-Carlo estimate of that expectation is a valid implementation, and there are two natural ones. (i) Sampling (direct). Estimate (3) by drawing histories from ρ⋆t and averaging the unweighted loss. Since the pool only provides samples from Pt, we draw positions with pt ∝ wt Pt = ρ⋆t – i.e. resample the pooled positions in proportion to the step-decay schedule – and apply the loss with no reweighting. This is the direct estimator of (3): the schedule appears only in 11 Algorithm 1 Replayed-Prefix On-Policy Distillation (ReOPD) 

Require: teacher pool DT , teacher πT , student πθ , step-decay schedule ω(t; κ) = κt 

> 1:

initialize θold ← θ 

> 2:

for each OPD iteration do  

> 3:

assemble candidate positions {(x, h t)} from pooled trajectories ▷ prefix ht: teacher actions A<t ,teacher observations O≤t 

> 4:

draw positions with pt ∝ ω(t; κ) ▷ early, low-shift steps sampled more often  

> 5:

for each sampled position ( x, h t) do  

> 6:

student generates its action At = ( a1 

> t

, . . . , a nt 

> t

) ∼ πθold (· | x, h t) ▷ token contexts on-policy; no environment call  

> 7:

accumulate Pnt 

> j=1

DKL 

 πθ (· | x, h t, a <j t ) ∥ πT (· | x, h t, a <j t ) ▷ per-token KL along the student’s action At 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

update θ on the accumulated loss; θold ← θ 

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

return πθ

which positions are trained, matching how the offline pool is streamed and touching only a subset of positions per step. (ii) Weighting (importance). Keep the pooled samples from Pt and instead multiply the loss by 

wt. The importance identity EHt∼P t [wt ℓ] = EHt∼ρ⋆t [ℓ] makes this the importance-weighted estimator of the 

same expectation, at a compute cost proportional to enumerating every position. Sampling is therefore not an approximation of weighting: both are unbiased estimators of the single distributional objective (3), with sampling the more direct one. We use sampling in all experiments and treat weighting as an equivalent alternative. 

Setting the decay. The only free knob is the steepness κ. The map (8) makes it measurable: κ ≈

exp( −γt ¯c) is read off from the per-step teacher–student gap ¯ c, an average DKL (πT ∥πθold ) estimated directly on the pool. The weight always decreases with depth, so early, low-shift steps receive the most mass and 

κ only sets how fast it falls off: κ = 1 is uniform (OPD-like) and smaller κ concentrates supervision on the early steps. The two regimes read off through ¯ c – a small gap gives κ ≈ 1 and gentle decay, a large gap (e.g. the wide teacher–student math setting) gives small κ and steep decay – and steepness is set empirically in Section 5, entering only through the sampling probability pt ∝ wt (equivalently, a weight wt). 

Why this is more than “make it on-policy”. Standard OPD pushes prefixes toward the student by re-rolling through a live environment; ReOPD instead replays a teacher-forced prefix and corrects with a reliability-aware step-decay schedule, achieving student relevance off-environment. The principle is reliability-aware prefix distribution design, which we implement by sampling prefixes along that schedule. 

Relation to RL and distillation. ReOPD sits between reinforcement learning and distillation, and the bridge parameter γt is precisely the slider between them. Like on-policy RL, the student acts at the supervised step and is trained on its own actions, so the signal is relevant to what the student will do; like distillation, the supervision is the teacher’s full per-step conditional πT (· | x, h t) rather than a scalar return. This is the sense in which on-policy distillation provides a dense improvement signal where RL provides a sparse one (Thinking Machines Lab, 2025): RL conveys a few bits per episode, whereas matching a distribution supervises every token. In our occupancy language, γt → 1 places the effective prefix distribution at the student occupancy dtθold – the regime on-policy methods target – while γt → 0 places it at the teacher occupancy dtT – ordinary teacher-forced distillation – and intermediate values interpolate. This should not be mistaken for off-policy or reward-weighted RL. We do not estimate returns or ad-vantages, apply no importance-sampling correction to a value function, and never optimize a scalar reward; the target is a fixed teacher distribution and the weight wt encodes the reliability and student-relevance of 12 Table 1: Training parameters for different methods. GRPO is only used to train the teacher model. And the teacher’s rollouts for GRPO are reused for ReOPD.                                                                           

> Hyper-parameter Cold Start SFT GRPO OPD ReOPD
> batch size 64 64 32 ×8 ( n= 8) 256 ×1 (n=1) 256 ×1 (n=1) lr 5e-5 5e-5 1e-6 1e-6 1e-6 lr scheduler cosine cosine constant constant constant min lr 1e-6 1e-6 ---warmup ratio 0.1 0.1 ---epoch / steps 5 epochs 5 epochs 200 steps 200 steps 200 steps clip ( ϵlow ,ϵhigh )--(0.2, 0.28) --temperature --1.0 1.0 1.0 max gen tokens --8192 for Math 8192 for Math 8192 for Math --4196 for Search 4196 for Search 4196 for Search ---8192 for multi-envs 8192 for multi-envs max number of tool calls --16 for Math 16 for Math 16 for Math --4 for Search 4 for Search 4 for Search ---16 for multi-envs 16 for multi-envs

Table 2: Evaluation hyper-parameters for two environments.             

> Hyper-parameter Math with Python Search
> temperature 1.0 1.0 max gen tokens 16384 8192 accuracy avg@n n= 8 (AIME24, AIME25, AMC23) or n= 4 (the rest) n= 1

the replayed prefix, not a policy-gradient ratio. Nor do we require environment interaction: the “on-policy” part is the student’s action at a single step on a replayed prefix, not a fresh rollout. ReOPD is thus best read as distillation with an on-policy supervised step and a reliability-aware prefix distribution – inheriting the relevance of RL-style on-policy data and the density of distillation, while avoiding both the sparsity of reward and the cost of online rollouts. 

# 5 Experiments 

Models. We use Qwen3-family models (Yang et al., 2025) as both teachers and students. To vary the teacher–student capability gap, we distill from teachers of three scales – Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507, Qwen3-8B, and Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 – into a Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 student; we additionally use Qwen3-8B as a student under the Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 teacher. All models go through a cold start stage with supervised finetuning (SFT) on trajectories collected by a stronger model, which aims to teach the models to better utilize the available tools and output a correct format. Without the cold start stage, we observe that the model frequently ignores the Python tool for math tasks. After SFT, the teacher model is then trained with GRPO on the training set. Such a design aims to imitate a practical setting: We first apply RL to obtain a stronger teacher model, and then we distill from the teacher model to the student model. In short, the teacher model will go through SFT (cold start) and RL, while the student model is initialized from the cold start version. By default, the teacher prefix pool is the set of agentic trajectories produced by the teacher while being trained with on-policy RL (GRPO). In this way, we can reuse the trajectories from the training of the teacher model without any extra collection cost (Section 4). 

Datasets & environments. We train and evaluate in two agentic tasks, both following the same three-stage protocol: an SFT cold start on 2K teacher trajectories (for both teacher and student), GRPO (Shao 13 Table 3: Distillation on mathematical reasoning. Each student is trained and evaluated in the math (Python-tool) environment on six competition benchmarks, under teachers of increasing scale. Across teacher scales, ReOPD improves over student-on-policy OPD on mathematical reasoning – the teacher-reliability regime of Section 3 – and stays close to OPD when the gap is small. The better of OPD and ReOPD in each column is in bold; GRPO is the teacher’s own RL result, shown for reference.                                                                                                                               

> Method AIME24 AIME25 AMC23 Minerva Olympiad MATH500 Avg.
> Teacher model: Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507
> GRPO 42.1 32.1 79.7 37.9 56.1 85.1 55.5
> Student model: Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507
> Base 6.3 6.7 36.6 31.0 29.5 58.2 28.0 Cold Start 22.1 20.8 66.6 32.4 49.0 79.1 45.0 SFT 21.7 21.3 63.1 39.8 49.9 80.9 46.1 OPD 35.4 29.2 77.8 43.3 58.2 86.9 55.1 ReOPD 40.8 31.3 80.0 42.9 59.4 88.9 57.2
> Teacher model: Qwen3-8B
> GRPO 28.3 23.3 73.1 38.5 52.0 84.3 49.9
> Student model: Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507
> SFT 22.1 22.9 63.8 36.0 44.7 80.8 45.0 OPD 28.3 26.3 70.3 39.8 55.3 85.8 51.0 ReOPD 36.7 29.2 74.4 41.1 56.4 84.7 53.7
> Teacher model: Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507
> GRPO 47.9 35.0 91.3 46.4 63.7 92.1 62.7
> Student model: Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507
> OPD 28.3 25.8 75.3 39.6 53.6 83.8 51.1 ReOPD 32.5 26.7 74.4 39.4 55.8 86.5 52.5
> Student model: Qwen3-8B
> Base 21.3 11.3 43.1 37.2 34.4 64.8 35.3 Cold Start 23.9 19.6 67.8 38.6 49.0 82.0 46.8 OPD 40.8 29.2 77.8 45.1 56.9 89.0 56.5 ReOPD 41.7 30.4 80.6 44.1 55.7 88.4 56.8

et al., 2024) training of the teacher, and student distillation (OPD or ReOPD) on that same prompt set. 

(i) Mathematical reasoning (Python-tool environment). Following ReTool (Feng et al., 2025), cold-start traces are taken from ReTool and the 6.4K prompts for GRPO and distillation are taken from the DAPO training set (Yu et al., 2025). We evaluate on six competition benchmarks – AIME24 (MAA Committees, 2024), AIME25 (MAA Committees, 2025), AMC23 (Li et al., 2024), Minerva Math (Lewkowycz et al., 2022), OlympiadBench (He et al., 2024), and MATH500 (Hendrycks et al., 2021). (ii) Search (retrieval environment). Following Search-R1 (Jin et al., 2025), prompts come from the merged NQ (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) and HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018) training sets: we randomly sample 2K prompts for cold-start trajectory generation by Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507, and another 6.5K prompts for teacher GRPO and student distillation. For retrieval, we use the 2018 Wikipedia dump (Karpukhin et al., 2020) as the knowledge source and E5 (Wang et al., 2022) as the retriever, with top-3 retrieved passages. We evaluate on seven QA benchmarks – general QA (NQ, TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017), PopQA (Mallen et al., 2023)) and multi-hop QA (HotpotQA, 2WikiMultiHopQA (Ho et al., 2020), MuSiQue (Trivedi et al., 2022), Bamboogle (Press et al., 2023)) – with NQ and HotpotQA in-domain ( †) and the remaining five out-of-domain ( ∗). In the multi-environment setting, a single student is trained jointly on both environments’ training data for both SFT and OPD/ReOPD and evaluated on all benchmarks. The training data from both environments are concatenated and shuffled. We still use the teacher model trained on the single environment, which is a practical setting that distills knowledge from domain-specific teacher to a general student. 14 Table 4: Distillation on search. Each student is trained and evaluated in the search environment on general-QA and multi-hop-QA benchmarks ( † in-domain, ∗ out-of-domain). The teacher stays in the same Qwen3-4B family and remains reliable on student-induced histories, so the student-occupancy shift dominates and ReOPD essentially matches student-on-policy OPD. The better of OPD and ReOPD in each column is in bold; GRPO is the teacher’s own RL result, shown for reference.                                                                         

> Method General QA Multi-Hop QA Avg.
> NQ †TriviaQA ∗PopQA ∗HotpotQA †2wiki ∗Musique ∗Bamboogle ∗
> Teacher model: Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507
> GRPO 36.1 59.2 40.2 37.2 31.8 13.8 39.2 40.4
> Student model: Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507
> Base 28.4 55.5 30.6 30.8 33.6 8.4 35.8 35.6 Cold Start 26.2 48.6 33.6 24.7 26.6 5.8 24.8 32.1 OPD 36.3 59.7 40.3 37.3 31.7 14.5 44.0 40.6
> ReOPD 36.4 59.6 40.5 37.3 31.5 14.0 37.6 40.5
> Teacher model: Qwen3-8B
> GRPO 36.6 59.3 40.2 36.7 34.7 13.8 39.2 41.0
> Student model: Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507
> OPD 35.5 57.3 39.0 35.0 31.2 12.8 37.6 39.1
> ReOPD 34.9 57.5 39.1 34.6 31.0 11.9 37.6 39.0

Baselines. We compare ReOPD against the following methods. Base : the untrained model. Cold Start :the model is trained with SFT for the cold start stage. This is also the initialized model for the following methods and ReOPD. SFT : the model is trained on the trajectories collected from the teacher model (same as ReOPD) with SFT. OPD : fully student-on-policy distillation, where prefixes are re-rolled by the current student through the live environment and the teacher supplies the per-step target. GRPO : the teacher’s own RL result, shown for reference as a soft upper bound at the teacher’s scale, not a competing student. 

Implementation details. In Table 1 and 2, we list the main experimental settings for training and evaluation. ReOPD and OPD share the same teacher target, batch size, number of update steps and so on. The only difference is the prefix distribution. Unless noted, ReOPD uses the sampling implementation with a step-decay schedule (Section 4) with κ = 0 .6. Following Feng et al. (2025) and Jin et al. (2025), we report the macro and micro averages for the math and search tasks, respectively. 

## 5.1 Main Results 

Single environment. Tables 3 and 4 compare ReOPD with fully online OPD in single-environment dis-tillation. On mathematical reasoning, ReOPD consistently improves the student average over OPD across teacher settings. With a Qwen3-4B teacher and Qwen3-4B student, ReOPD improves the average from 55 .1to 57 .2; with a Qwen3-8B teacher, it improves from 51 .0 to 53 .7; and with a Qwen3-30B-A3B teacher, it improves the Qwen3-4B student from 51 .1 to 52 .5. For the stronger Qwen3-8B student under the Qwen3-30B-A3B teacher, ReOPD also slightly improves the average from 56 .5 to 56 .8. These gains are largest when the teacher–student gap is wider, consistent with our teacher-reliability view: fully student-on-policy roll-ins can drift into histories where the teacher target is less reliable, while ReOPD stays anchored to teacher-supported prefixes. On search, ReOPD essentially matches OPD. With a Qwen3-4B teacher, OPD and ReOPD obtain 40 .6and 40 .5 average accuracy, respectively; with a Qwen3-8B teacher, they obtain 39 .1 and 39 .0. This is the regime where the teacher remains reliable on student-induced histories, so the benefit of teacher-anchored replay is smaller. Together, the math and search results show that ReOPD preserves OPD-level accuracy in the reliable-teacher regime and improves over OPD when teacher reliability becomes the dominant constraint. 15 Table 5: Multi-environment distillation: one student for both domains. A single Qwen3-4B student is trained jointly across the math and search environments and evaluated on both – unlike the single-environment results (Tables 3 and 4), where a separate student is trained per domain. The teacher, by contrast, is not shared across domains: each environment has its own RL-trained Qwen3-4B teacher, so the GRPO reference columns for math and search are two different models. Distilled from its environment’s teacher, the single joint student stays on par with student-on-policy OPD in each domain, showing that ReOPD’s reliability-aware schedule carries over to joint training. Benchmarks are rows and methods are columns ( † in-domain, ∗ out-of-domain); the student base model is Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507, and GRPO is the teacher’s own RL result for reference. For each benchmark the better of OPD and ReOPD is in bold.                                                                 

> Benchmark Teacher (Qwen3-4B) Student (Qwen3-4B) GRPO Cold Start OPD ReOPD
> Mathematical reasoning
> AIME24 42.1 18.8 32.5 36.3
> AIME25 32.1 23.8 35.4 30.8 AMC23 79.7 67.8 75.9 75.5 Minerva 37.9 40.5 43.5 44.5
> Olympiad 56.1 48.9 57.4 57.4
> MATH500 85.1 82.4 86.7 87.3
> Avg. 55.5 47.0 55.2 55.3
> Search / QA
> NQ †36.1 25.7 37.3 37.7
> TriviaQA ∗59.2 51.3 61.0 60.7 PopQA ∗40.2 33.2 40.5 40.6
> HotpotQA †37.2 25.1 38.0 37.6 2wiki ∗31.8 27.1 31.6 32.1
> Musique ∗13.8 6.3 14.5 13.8 Bamboogle ∗39.2 29.6 44.0 37.6
> Avg. 40.4 32.7 41.0 41.0

Multiple environments. Table 5 evaluates a single Qwen3-4B student trained jointly on the math and search environments. ReOPD remains on par with OPD in both domains while avoiding online environment interaction during student training. This indicates that the same replay-based training pipeline can combine heterogeneous environments without keeping all tools online during distillation. The result is especially useful operationally: each environment can contribute teacher rollouts to a shared offline pool, and the student can then be trained jointly from the merged data. 

Efficiency. Figure 1 shows that ReOPD keeps the accuracy benefits of OPD while removing its main training-time bottleneck. Unlike OPD, which must execute fresh environment rollouts and tool calls during every student update, ReOPD replays teacher-recorded prefixes and therefore uses zero tool calls during student training. This also translates into faster updates: ReOPD is at least 4 × faster per training step than OPD. Thus, ReOPD preserves or improves OPD-level accuracy while replacing expensive online interaction with reusable offline teacher trajectories. 

## 5.2 Analysis and Discussion 

Validating the step-level schedule. Figure 5 tests whether the depth proxy of Section 4 actually matters for final performance. Because the prefix is teacher-forced and only the current step is student-on-policy, the two-sided shift is smallest at early steps and grows with depth. Both panels use the sampling implementation: varying which chunk is drawn (Fig. 5a) performs best when it draws more early chunks, and varying the decay steepness κ (Fig. 5b) shows the same trend as late steps are sampled less. The agreement between the two knobs corroborates the step-decay schedule of Section 4; the improvement from favoring early, low-shift steps shows that the gain comes from reliability-aware prefix selection rather than simply using more data. 16 0 1 2 3       

> Chunk index
> 50
> 52
> 54
> 56
> 58
> Average accuracy (%)
> 56.6
> 50.9
> 58.7
> 56.6 56.3
> 54.9
> 53.9
> 53.1
> 50.7
> 50.1
> Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507
> Qwen3-8B
> All chunks (a) Sampling by chunk index. 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> 51.0
> 51.5
> 52.0
> 52.5
> 53.0
> 53.5
> Average accuracy (%)
> 53.4
> 53.0
> 53.4
> 52.2
> 50.9
> Qwen3-8B (b) Sampling with decay κ.

Figure 5: Favoring early, low-shift steps improves distillation. Both panels use ReOPD’s sampling implementation and put more training mass on early interaction steps, where the student stays close to the teacher and the two-sided shift is small. (a) Sampling by chunk : drawing supervised positions from early chunks yields the best student, and pushing mass to later chunks degrades it. (b) Sampling with decay κ:applying the step-decay κt as the sampling probability, a moderate decay outperforms uniform sampling (κ = 1) and tracks the same trend. Final performance is governed by how strongly early steps are favored, validating the step-decay of Section 4. The student model is Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507, and the models in the legends are teacher model. 

Two regimes in practice. The tables reveal the two regimes anticipated by our analysis. On search and multi-hop QA, where the teachers stay reliable on student-induced histories, the student-occupancy shift dominates: student-on-policy OPD is already strong, and ReOPD – whose teacher-anchored roll-in is already student-relevant here, since the two occupancies nearly coincide – essentially matches it (e.g. a 40 .5vs. 40 .6 average under the single-environment setting). On mathematical reasoning the picture changes as the teacher–student gap widens. With stronger teachers (Qwen3-8B and Qwen3-30B-A3B), student roll-ins drift into histories where the teacher’s trajectory is the more trustworthy signal, so the teacher-reliability shift dominates; ReOPD’s teacher-anchored roll-in sidesteps these unreliable histories and attains its largest gains, improving AIME24 from 28 .3 to 36 .7 under the Qwen3-8B teacher while lifting the 4B-student math average in every teacher setting (55 .1 → 57 .2, 51 .0 → 53 .7, 51 .1 → 52 .5). Which roll-in is preferable thus depends on the regime – the teacher-anchored pool wins when the gap is large and ties student-on-policy OPD when the teacher is already reliable, rather than committing to a fixed student-on-policy roll-in. Our analysis prescribes a steeper decay as the teacher–student gap grows (Section 4); notably, these results obtain the regime-appropriate behavior with a single fixed κ = 0 .6 across tasks rather than per-task tuning, and gap-adaptive schedules are a natural extension. 

Prefix source: reliability, not raw capability. Step index is only a proxy; what it ultimately stands in for is support overlap between the student-relevant histories and the teacher’s reliable region. Figure 6 isolates this by varying where prefixes come from while holding the distillation target fixed at the teacher. One might expect prefixes from a larger or stronger generator to help, since such models make fewer mistakes. We observe the opposite: prefixes drawn from the teacher’s own model are best, and substituting a larger or stronger prefix generator degrades the distilled student. This is a direct test of the teacher-reliability shift. The teacher’s recorded conditional is a reliable improvement signal only on the histories the teacher itself is likely to visit; prefixes from a different, stronger model fall outside this support, so querying the teacher there yields a less trustworthy target. The right notion for prefix selection is therefore reliability with respect to the teacher , not the standalone capability of the prefix generator – precisely the quantity ReOPD’s reliability-aware prefix selection is designed to respect. 17 Average AIME24 AIME25 AMC23 Minerva Olympiad MATH500      

> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> Average accuracy (%)  OPD 4B prefix 8B prefix 32B prefix
> 52.9
> 33.3
> 28.8
> 75.3
> 40.0
> 55.0
> 85.2
> 53.7
> 36.7
> 29.2
> 74.4
> 41.1
> 56.4
> 84.7
> 49.3
> 26.7 25.8
> 69.4
> 39.4
> 51.9
> 82.7
> 51.0
> 28.3 26.2
> 70.3
> 39.8
> 55.3
> 85.8

Figure 6: Prefix source: the teacher’s own model gives the best prefixes, not a stronger gener-ator. Teacher Qwen3-8B, student Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507; we fix the distillation target to the teacher and vary only the prefix generator. Performance peaks when prefixes come from the teacher itself and degrades 

with larger or stronger generators – a direct test of the teacher-reliability view: the teacher’s conditional is trustworthy only on prefixes within its own support. Table 6: RL-collected pool vs. stationary teacher pool. ReOPD reuses the teacher’s RL rollouts, a 

mixed-policy pool spanning early-to-late checkpoints, rather than a stationary pool drawn from the final teacher. Distilling against the final teacher from each pool gives nearly identical students, so the free RL by-product is as good as a dedicated collection. The teacher and student models are Qwen3-8B and Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507, respectively. 

Prefix pool AIME24 AIME25 AMC23 Minerva Olympiad MATH500 Avg. 

Final-teacher (stationary) 37.9 30.0 72.2 39.2 56.2 85.0 53.4 RL rollouts (free, mixed) 36.7 29.2 74.4 41.1 56.4 84.7 53.7 

RL-collected pool matches a stationary teacher pool. A natural concern is that the RL-collected pool is not stationary: it mixes rollouts from weaker early checkpoints with the final teacher, so it need not match a pool drawn purely from the converged teacher. Table 6 tests this by fixing the distillation target to the final teacher and varying only the prefix pool. The two pools yield nearly identical students, confirming that the checkpoint-to-checkpoint drift in RL rollouts is within the teacher’s reliable support and that no dedicated collection is needed – the free by-product suffices. 

# 6 Conclusion 

We studied Replayed-Prefix On-Policy Distillation in an efficient, off-environment regime that reuses a fixed pool of pre-collected teacher trajectories, replaying a teacher-forced prefix and supervising the student’s action at the current step. Removing the environment does not remove the temporal structure of multi-turn learning: we identified a prefix trap with a temporal layer (compounding errors) and a distributional layer (a two-sided shift), and bounded the gap to an ideal interactive improvement objective (1) by a student occupancy-mismatch term and a teacher reliability term (4). This recasts multi-turn OPD as reliability-aware prefix distribution design – balancing student relevance against teacher reliability, with fully student-on-policy and teacher-forced roll-ins as the two extremes – which the resulting algorithm, ReOPD, realizes with a simple step-decay schedule applied by default as a sampling probability (equivalently, a loss weight). Our experiments confirm the predicted regime-aware behavior: ReOPD stays OPD-like when the teacher– student gap is small and yields its largest gains when the gap is large and teacher-supported prefixes are the 18 more reliable supervision region. 

Limitations and future work. Our analysis assumes access to a pre-collected pool of teacher trajectories with recorded observations. In our experiments this comes for free from the teacher’s own RL rollouts, but more generally the pool’s coverage and quality bound what the student can learn. The reliability surrogate we adopt reduces, to first order, to a step-decaying weight, which is effective but coarse: it captures how deep a prefix is rather than directly measuring how far a given prefix lies from the overlap between student-relevant histories and the teacher’s reliable support, and a learned or data-dependent reliability estimate may improve on the schedule. Finally, our two-sided bound treats the teacher reliability error through teacher support as a surrogate; tighter, directly estimable notions of teacher reliability – and schedules or weights that adapt to them online – are a natural next step. 

# References 

Agarwal, R., Vieillard, N., Zhou, Y., Stanczyk, P., Ramos, S., Geist, M., and Bachem, O. (2024). On-policy distillation of language models: Learning from self-generated mistakes. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Ahmadian, A., Cremer, C., Gall´ e, M., Fadaee, M., Kreutzer, J., Pietquin, O., ¨Ust¨ un, A., and Hooker, S. (2024). Back to basics: Revisiting reinforce style optimization for learning from human feedback in llms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14740 .Aksitov, R., Miryoosefi, S., Li, Z., Li, D., Babayan, S., Kopparapu, K., Fisher, Z., Guo, R., Prakash, S., Srinivasan, P., et al. (2023). Rest meets react: Self-improvement for multi-step reasoning llm agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10003 .Anthony, T., Tian, Z., and Barber, D. (2017). Thinking fast and slow with deep learning and tree search. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 30. Azar, M. G., Rowland, M., Piot, B., Guo, D., Calandriello, D., Valko, M., and Munos, R. (2023). A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from human preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12036 .Bai, Y., Jones, A., Ndousse, K., Askell, A., Chen, A., DasSarma, N., Drain, D., Fort, S., Ganguli, D., Henighan, T., et al. (2022). Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862 .Bengio, S., Vinyals, O., Jaitly, N., and Shazeer, N. (2015). Scheduled sampling for sequence prediction with recurrent neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Bradley, R. A. and Terry, M. E. (1952). Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method of paired comparisons. Biometrika , 39(3/4):324–345. Chen, B., Shu, C., Shareghi, E., Collier, N., Narasimhan, K., and Yao, S. (2023). Fireact: Toward language agent fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05915 .Chen, Z., Liu, K., Wang, Q., Zhang, W., Liu, J., Lin, D., Chen, K., and Zhao, F. (2024). Agent-flan: Design-ing data and methods of effective agent tuning for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12881 .DeepSeek-AI, Guo, D., Yang, D., Zhang, H., Song, J., Zhang, R., Xu, R., Zhu, Q., Ma, S., Wang, P., Bi, X., Zhang, X., Yu, X., Wu, Y., Wu, Z. F., Gou, Z., Shao, Z., Li, Z., Gao, Z., Liu, A., Xue, B., Wang, B., Wu, B., Feng, B., Lu, C., Zhao, C., Deng, C., Zhang, C., Ruan, C., Dai, D., Chen, D., Ji, D., Li, E., Lin, F., Dai, F., Luo, F., Hao, G., Chen, G., Li, G., Zhang, H., Bao, H., Xu, H., Wang, H., Ding, H., Xin, H., Gao, H., Qu, H., Li, H., Guo, J., Li, J., Wang, J., Chen, J., Yuan, J., Qiu, J., Li, J., Cai, J. L., Ni, J., Liang, J., Chen, J., Dong, K., Hu, K., Gao, K., Guan, K., Huang, K., Yu, K., Wang, L., Zhang, L., Zhao, L., 19 Wang, L., Zhang, L., Xu, L., Xia, L., Zhang, M., Zhang, M., Tang, M., Li, M., Wang, M., Li, M., Tian, N., Huang, P., Zhang, P., Wang, Q., Chen, Q., Du, Q., Ge, R., Zhang, R., Pan, R., Wang, R., Chen, R. J., Jin, R. L., Chen, R., Lu, S., Zhou, S., Chen, S., Ye, S., Wang, S., Yu, S., Zhou, S., Pan, S., Li, S. S., Zhou, S., Wu, S., Ye, S., Yun, T., Pei, T., Sun, T., Wang, T., Zeng, W., Zhao, W., Liu, W., Liang, W., Gao, W., Yu, W., Zhang, W., Xiao, W. L., An, W., Liu, X., Wang, X., Chen, X., Nie, X., Cheng, X., Liu, X., Xie, X., Liu, X., Yang, X., Li, X., Su, X., Lin, X., Li, X. Q., Jin, X., Shen, X., Chen, X., Sun, X., Wang, X., Song, X., Zhou, X., Wang, X., Shan, X., Li, Y. K., Wang, Y. Q., Wei, Y. X., Zhang, Y., Xu, Y., Li, Y., Zhao, Y., Sun, Y., Wang, Y., Yu, Y., Zhang, Y., Shi, Y., Xiong, Y., He, Y., Piao, Y., Wang, Y., Tan, Y., Ma, Y., Liu, Y., Guo, Y., Ou, Y., Wang, Y., Gong, Y., Zou, Y., He, Y., Xiong, Y., Luo, Y., You, Y., Liu, Y., Zhou, Y., Zhu, Y. X., Xu, Y., Huang, Y., Li, Y., Zheng, Y., Zhu, Y., Ma, Y., Tang, Y., Zha, Y., Yan, Y., Ren, Z. Z., Ren, Z., Sha, Z., Fu, Z., Xu, Z., Xie, Z., Zhang, Z., Hao, Z., Ma, Z., Yan, Z., Wu, Z., Gu, Z., Zhu, Z., Liu, Z., Li, Z., Xie, Z., Song, Z., Pan, Z., Huang, Z., Xu, Z., Zhang, Z., and Zhang, Z. (2025). Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. Dong, H., Xiong, W., Goyal, D., Zhang, Y., Chow, W., Pan, R., Diao, S., Zhang, J., SHUM, K., and Zhang, T. (2023). RAFT: Reward ranked finetuning for generative foundation model alignment. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Dong, H., Xiong, W., Pang, B., Wang, H., Zhao, H., Zhou, Y., Jiang, N., Sahoo, D., Xiong, C., and Zhang, T. (2024). Rlhf workflow: From reward modeling to online rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07863 .Feng, J., Huang, S., Qu, X., Zhang, G., Qin, Y., Zhong, B., Jiang, C., Chi, J., and Zhong, W. (2025). Retool: Reinforcement learning for strategic tool use in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11536 .Gou, Z., Shao, Z., Gong, Y., Yang, Y., Huang, M., Duan, N., Chen, W., et al. (2023). Tora: A tool-integrated reasoning agent for mathematical problem solving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17452 .Gu, Y., Dong, L., Wei, F., and Huang, M. (2024). MiniLLM: Knowledge distillation of large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Gulcehre, C., Paine, T. L., Srinivasan, S., Konyushkova, K., Weerts, L., Sharma, A., Siddhant, A., Ahern, A., Wang, M., Gu, C., et al. (2023). Reinforced self-training (rest) for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08998 .He, C., Luo, R., Bai, Y., Hu, S., Thai, Z. L., Shen, J., Hu, J., Han, X., Huang, Y., Zhang, Y., et al. (2024). Olympiadbench: A challenging benchmark for promoting agi with olympiad-level bilingual multimodal scientific problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14008 .Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Kadavath, S., Arora, A., Basart, S., Tang, E., Song, D., and Steinhardt, J. (2021). Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03874 .Hinton, G., Vinyals, O., and Dean, J. (2015). Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 .Ho, X., Nguyen, A.-K. D., Sugawara, S., and Aizawa, A. (2020). Constructing a multi-hop qa dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING) .Hsieh, C.-Y., Li, C.-L., Yeh, C.-K., Nakhost, H., Fujii, Y., Ratner, A., Krishna, R., Lee, C.-Y., and Pfister, T. (2023). Distilling step-by-step! outperforming larger language models with less training data and smaller model sizes. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL Findings) .Jaech, A., Kalai, A., Lerer, A., Richardson, A., El-Kishky, A., Low, A., Helyar, A., Madry, A., Beutel, A., Carney, A., et al. (2024). Openai o1 system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16720 .Jin, B., Zeng, H., Yue, Z., Yoon, J., Arik, S., Wang, D., Zamani, H., and Han, J. (2025). Search-r1: Training llms to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516 .20 Joshi, M., Choi, E., Weld, D. S., and Zettlemoyer, L. (2017). Triviaqa: A large scale distantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .Karpukhin, V., Oguz, B., Min, S., Lewis, P., Wu, L., Edunov, S., Chen, D., and Yih, W.-t. (2020). Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) , pages 6769–6781. Kim, Y. and Rush, A. M. (2016). Sequence-level knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 1317–1327. Ko, J., Chen, T., Kim, S., Ding, T., Liang, L., Zharkov, I., and Yun, S.-Y. (2025). Distillm-2: A contrastive approach boosts the distillation of llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07067 .Ko, J., Kim, S., Chen, T., and Yun, S.-Y. (2024). Distillm: Towards streamlined distillation for large language models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .Kool, W., van Hoof, H., and Welling, M. (2019). Buy 4 reinforce samples, get a baseline for free! Kwiatkowski, T., Palomaki, J., Redfield, O., Collins, M., Parikh, A., Alberti, C., Epstein, D., Polosukhin, I., Devlin, J., Lee, K., et al. (2019). Natural questions: a benchmark for question answering research. 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 7:453–466. Lamb, A., Goyal, A., Zhang, Y., Zhang, S., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y. (2016). Professor forcing: A new algorithm for training recurrent networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Lewkowycz, A., Andreassen, A., Dohan, D., Dyer, E., Michalewski, H., Ramasesh, V., Slone, A., Anil, C., Schlag, I., Gutman-Solo, T., et al. (2022). Solving quantitative reasoning problems with language models. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:3843–3857. Li, J., Beeching, E., Tunstall, L., Lipkin, B., Soletskyi, R., Huang, S., Rasul, K., Yu, L., Jiang, A. Q., Shen, Z., et al. (2024). Numinamath: The largest public dataset in ai4maths with 860k pairs of competition math problems and solutions. Hugging Face repository , 13(9):9. Li, Z., Xu, T., Zhang, Y., Yu, Y., Sun, R., and Luo, Z.-Q. (2023). Remax: A simple, effective, and efficient reinforcement learning method for aligning large language models. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2310. Liao, B., Dong, H., Xu, X., Monz, C., and Bian, J. (2026). Self-hinting language models enhance reinforce-ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.03143 .Liu, T., Zhao, Y., Joshi, R., Khalman, M., Saleh, M., Liu, P. J., and Liu, J. (2023). Statistical rejection sampling improves preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06657 .MAA Committees (2024). AIME Problems and Solutions. https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/ index.php/AIME_Problems_and_Solutions .MAA Committees (2025). AIME Problems and Solutions. https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/ index.php/AIME_Problems_and_Solutions .Mallen, A., Asai, A., Zhong, V., Das, R., Khashabi, D., and Hajishirzi, H. (2023). When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness of parametric and non-parametric memories. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .Mitra, A., Khanpour, H., Rosset, C., and Awadallah, A. (2024). Orca-math: Unlocking the potential of slms in grade school math. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14830 .21 Nakano, R., Hilton, J., Balaji, S., Wu, J., Ouyang, L., Kim, C., Hesse, C., Jain, S., Kosaraju, V., Saunders, W., et al. (2021). Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332 .Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Ray, A., et al. (2022). Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:27730–27744. Press, O., Zhang, M., Min, S., Schmidt, L., Smith, N. A., and Lewis, M. (2023). Measuring and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 .Rafailov, R., Sharma, A., Mitchell, E., Ermon, S., Manning, C. D., and Finn, C. (2023). Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18290 .Ranzato, M., Chopra, S., Auli, M., and Zaremba, W. (2016). Sequence level training with recurrent neural networks. In The Fourth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Ross, S., Gordon, G. J., and Bagnell, J. A. (2011). A reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) , pages 627–635. Schick, T., Dwivedi-Yu, J., Dess` ı, R., Raileanu, R., Lomeli, M., Hambro, E., Zettlemoyer, L., Cancedda, N., and Scialom, T. (2023). Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and Klimov, O. (2017). Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 .Shao, Z., Wang, P., Zhu, Q., Xu, R., Song, J., Zhang, M., Li, Y., Wu, Y., and Guo, D. (2024). Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 .Shinn, N., Cassano, F., Gopinath, A., Narasimhan, K., and Yao, S. (2024). Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36. Singh, A., Co-Reyes, J. D., Agarwal, R., Anand, A., Patil, P., Liu, P. J., Harrison, J., Lee, J., Xu, K., Parisi, A., et al. (2023). Beyond human data: Scaling self-training for problem-solving with language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06585 .Sun, Z., Li, D., Chen, X., Hu, B., and Zhang, M. (2025). Is on-policy data always the best choice for direct preference optimization-based lm alignment? arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10530 .Tajwar, F., Singh, A., Sharma, A., Rafailov, R., Schneider, J., Xie, T., Ermon, S., Finn, C., and Kumar, A. (2024). Preference fine-tuning of llms should leverage suboptimal, on-policy data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14367 .Tang, Y., Guo, Z. D., Zheng, Z., Calandriello, D., Munos, R., Rowland, M., Richemond, P. H., Valko, M., Pires, B. ´A., and Piot, B. (2024). Generalized preference optimization: A unified approach to offline alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05749 .Thinking Machines Lab (2025). On-policy distillation. https://thinkingmachines.ai/blog/ on-policy-distillation/ . Thinking Machines Lab blog. Trivedi, H., Balasubramanian, N., Khot, T., and Sabharwal, A. (2022). Musique: Multihop questions via single-hop question composition. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics (TACL) ,10. 22 Wang, B., Yan, S., Shen, C., Liu, K., Fan, S., Li, X., Miao, R., Yuan, X., Shen, Z., and Ye, J. (2026). Backtracking when it strays: Mitigating dual exposure biases in llm reasoning distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.19433 .Wang, L., Yang, N., Huang, X., Jiao, B., Yang, L., Jiang, D., Majumder, R., and Wei, F. (2022). Text embeddings by weakly-supervised contrastive pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03533 .Wang, P., Li, L., Shao, Z., Xu, R., Dai, D., Li, Y., Chen, D., Wu, Y., and Sui, Z. (2023). Math-shepherd: Verify and reinforce llms step-by-step without human annotations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.08935 .Wang, X., Wang, Z., Liu, J., Chen, Y., Yuan, L., Peng, H., and Ji, H. (2024). Mint: Multi-turn interactive evaluation for tool-augmented llms with language feedback. In Proc. The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR2024) .Williams, R. J. (1992). Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learn-ing. Machine learning , 8:229–256. Xiong, W., Dong, H., Ye, C., Wang, Z., Zhong, H., Ji, H., Jiang, N., and Zhang, T. (2023). Iterative preference learning from human feedback: Bridging theory and practice for rlhf under kl-constraint. In 

Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning .Xiong, W., Yao, J., Xu, Y., Pang, B., Wang, L., Sahoo, D., Li, J., Jiang, N., Zhang, T., Xiong, C., and Dong, H. (2025). A minimalist approach to llm reasoning: from rejection sampling to reinforce. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11343 .Xu, W., Han, R., Wang, Z., Le, L. T., Madeka, D., Li, L., Wang, W. Y., Agarwal, R., Lee, C.-Y., and Pfister, T. (2025a). Speculative knowledge distillation: Bridging the teacher-student gap through interleaved sampling. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Xu, Y., Dong, H., Wang, L., Sahoo, D., Li, J., and Xiong, C. (2025b). Scalable chain of thoughts via elastic reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05315 .Xu, Z., Jiang, F., Niu, L., Lin, B. Y., and Poovendran, R. (2024). Stronger models are not stronger teachers for instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.07133 .Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C., et al. (2025). Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 .Yang, Z., Qi, P., Zhang, S., Bengio, Y., Cohen, W., Salakhutdinov, R., and Manning, C. D. (2018). Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pages 2369–2380. Yao, J., Hao, Y., Zhang, H., Dong, H., Xiong, W., Jiang, N., and Zhang, T. (2025). Optimizing chain-of-thought reasoners via gradient variance minimization in rejection sampling and rl. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 38, pages 163245–163284. Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K., and Cao, Y. (2022). React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 .Ye, T., Dong, L., Chi, Z., Wu, X., Huang, S., and Wei, F. (2025). Black-box on-policy distillation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.10643 .Ye, T., Dong, L., Dong, Q., Wu, X., Huang, S., and Wei, F. (2026a). Online experiential learning for language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.16856 .Ye, T., Dong, L., Wu, X., Huang, S., and Wei, F. (2026b). On-policy context distillation for language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12275 .23 Yu, L., Jiang, W., Shi, H., Yu, J., Liu, Z., Zhang, Y., Kwok, J. T., Li, Z., Weller, A., and Liu, W. (2023). Metamath: Bootstrap your own mathematical questions for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12284 .Yu, Q., Zhang, Z., Zhu, R., Yuan, Y., Zuo, X., Yue, Y., Fan, T., Liu, G., Liu, L., Liu, X., et al. (2025). Dapo: An open-source llm reinforcement learning system at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14476 .Yue, X., Xingwei Qu, G. Z., Fu, Y., Huang, W., Sun, H., Su, Y., and Chen, W. (2023). Mammoth: Building math generalist models through hybrid instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05653 .Zelikman, E., Wu, Y., Mu, J., and Goodman, N. (2022). Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:15476–15488. Zhang, H., Wang, P., Diao, S., Lin, Y., Pan, R., Dong, H., Zhang, D., Molchanov, P., and Zhang, T. (2024). Entropy-regularized process reward model. Zhao, Y., Joshi, R., Liu, T., Khalman, M., Saleh, M., and Liu, P. J. (2023). Slic-hf: Sequence likelihood calibration with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10425 .Zhao, Z., Dong, H., Saha, A., Xiong, C., and Sahoo, D. (2024). Automatic curriculum expert iteration for reliable llm reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07627 .24