Title: Learning Explicit Behavioral Models with Adaptive Questions and World-Model Probes

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.07127v1

Published Time: Mon, 08 Jun 2026 00:52:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# Learning Explicit Behavioral Models with Adaptive Questions and World-Model Probes 

Hikaru Shindo 1,3 †, Yu Deng 1,2,3* †, Teng Cao 1,2,3* †,Quentin Delfosse 1,3, ‡ , Christopher Tauchmann 1,2,3 ,Jannis Bl¨ uml 1,3 , Gopika Sudhakaran 1,3 , Kristian Kersting 1,3,2,4,5 

> 1

Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Lab, Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany; 2Hessian Center for Artificial Intelligence (hessian.AI), Germany; 3Department of Computer Science, Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany; 4German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Germany; 

> 5

Centre for Cognitive Science, Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany *Corresponding authors: teng.cao@tu-darmstadt.de; yu.deng@tu-darmstadt.de; 

> †

These authors contributed equally to this work. ‡Quentin Delfosse is now at Intrinsic AI, Google. 

Abstract 

Interactive agents trained only against task return can achieve high scores while failing to represent the mechanisms that make their actions succeed. This makes brittle behavior difficult to diagnose and limits adaptation when environment dynamics change. Existing LLM reflection and policy-code repair can revise behavior from failed trajectories, but questions and world-understanding tests are usually used only after training. We introduce an Explicit Symbolic Behav-ioral Model (ESBM), a trainable behavioral model that couples task performance with evidence-grounded question answering and executable mechanism predic-tion. An ESBM represents behavior through typed predicates, weighted rules, bounded options and mechanism memory; the mechanism layer predicts symbolic events, object changes, rewards and terminal consequences under action inter-ventions. After each rollout, adaptive questions and active world-model probes convert score failures, QA errors and transition-prediction errors into constraints for local ESBM edits. Candidate models are selected by a multi-criterion rule that jointly evaluates task score, answerability and active world-model consis-tency. Under the tested Atari-style protocols, ESBM learns high-scoring policies while producing explicit answers and executable mechanism predictions, indi-cating that adaptive questions can serve as both training pressure and reusable benchmarks for mechanistic policy learning in this setting. 

Keywords: symbolic policy learning, adaptive questions, world models, reinforcement learning, interpretable agents, game understanding 

1        

> arXiv:2606.07127v1 [cs.LG] 5 Jun 2026 1Score-only training 2Hidden blind spot 3Mechanism change 4ESBM objective
> environment
> neural policy reward time high score
> policy unknown mechanisms ??unverified understanding

? high score can hide missing or wrong mechanisms rule changes hazard speed normal hazard speed faster 

≠ score is not understanding no mechanism model brittle behavior slow recovery performance grounded QA Q? ESBM predicates rules options mechanism memory active world-model probes diagnose → generate pressure edit symbolic model testable understanding faster adaptation Fig. 1 Problem definition and motivation. Task return alone can make a policy appear suc-cessful even when the mechanisms behind its behavior remain implicit or wrong. Under mechanism changes, score-only behavior may reveal brittle adaptation and slow recovery. ESBM addresses this gap by making predicates, rules, options and mechanism memory explicit objects for grounded ques-tions, active world-model probes and local symbolic edits. 

# 1 Introduction 

Interactive agents are usually evaluated by what they achieve, not by whether they represent why their actions work. In games and other sequential environments, this distinction is not cosmetic. A policy may obtain high reward by exploiting a narrow timing pattern, repeatedly collecting a local reward, or following an environment-specific shortcut, while lacking a usable model of the environment mechanisms that make the behavior succeed. Such high-score but low-understanding behavior is difficult to detect from scalar reward alone and is a common source of brittle policies. Figure 1 illustrates this problem definition. A score-only policy can appear suc-cessful while its mechanisms remain unknown or unverified; when the environment mechanism changes, the same policy may become brittle and recover slowly. This motivates optimizing an explicit behavioral model whose mechanisms can be queried, checked and locally edited. Recent LLM-based agents provide a natural way to revise policies from expe-rience. Reflection-based agents can summarize failures and use verbal feedback to improve behavior [1, 2]. Program-editing and embodied-control systems can gener-ate executable skills or policy code from language and environment feedback [3, 4]. Related work also uses LLMs to generate reward functions or dense training signals [5, 6]. More recent self-evolving agents co-train a curriculum generator and an execu-tor from model-generated tasks [7]. These systems show that LLMs can inspect failed trajectories, generate challenging tasks and revise executable artifacts, but the revi-sion loop often still relies on task success or latent model improvement as the primary judge of whether the change is useful. In parallel, work on world-understanding evaluation and dynamic benchmarks argues that aggregate task success is an incomplete proxy for grounded knowledge. 2Question-answering probes can test whether an agent knows object identities, haz-ards, reward mechanisms, action consequences, and counterfactual dynamics. Dynamic and adversarial benchmarks further show that fixed test sets can saturate and fail to expose model-specific blind spots [8–11]. However, these benchmarks are commonly used after training. They rarely become part of the mechanism that selects, repairs, or rejects a policy. This paper asks whether understanding can be optimized as part of the policy-learning loop. The central difficulty is that “understanding” must be testable rather than rhetorical. We therefore treat it as an explicit and executable object: a model state that can answer grounded questions, predict symbolic consequences and influence action selection. The agent is represented as an Explicit Symbolic Behavioral Model (ESBM), consisting of state-abstraction predicates, weighted action rules, bounded options and mechanism memory. The mechanism memory is not only a natural-language explanation store; it is an abstract world model that predicts how symbolic state, reward, lives and objects change under actions. We propose adaptive questions and world-model probes as a training mechanism for ESBMs. After each rollout, a challenger uses rollout failures, recent symbolic edits, QA mistakes and transition-prediction errors to generate two forms of pressure. The first is grounded QA, which asks about entities, hazards, rewards, routes, action consequences and counterfactual changes. The second is active world-model probing, which branches the real environment and the ESBM’s abstract world model from matched checkpoints under the same observed, counterfactual or mixed action sequence. The abstract model must then predict future events, score changes, life changes, player motion and object changes. The policy representation is deliberately symbolic. Predicates, rules, options, and mechanisms make updates local, executable, and auditable. A candidate change can be traced to a predicate threshold, a rule condition, an option contract, or a mech-anism transition. This substrate creates an interpretable chain from failure trace, to generated probe, to understanding failure, to ESBM edit, to changed behavior. It also makes high-score but low-understanding behavior observable: a candidate can improve task return while still being exposed by mechanism QA or active transition checks, and the accepted model can later be stress-tested by continuing optimization after controlled mechanism changes. We evaluate the approach on three primary Atari-style JAXAtari environments: 

kangaroo , seaquest and kingkong . These games require route planning, resource management, rescue behavior, timing and hazard avoidance, so they test both task performance and mechanism understanding. The experiments ask four questions: whether ESBM achieves competitive task scores, whether the learned model answers evidence-linked game-understanding questions, whether its mechanisms predict exe-cutable symbolic dynamics, and whether the model recovers after mechanism changes. Additional game scores are reported in the appendix for broader score context beyond the main comparison set. Our contributions are: 3• We define the ESBM as an explicit optimization object that combines state abstraction, symbolic action selection, bounded options, and executable mechanism memory. 

• We introduce policy-adaptive, evidence-grounded questions and active world-model probes that convert the current model’s failures into reusable understanding constraints. 

• We formulate a multi-criterion acceptance rule that selects local ESBM edits using task performance, QA accuracy and active interventional world-model consistency. 

# 2 Background 

Classical symbolic policies use predicates to map observations into semantic facts and weighted rules to map those facts into actions. This representation is interpretable, but a flat predicate-rule policy is not enough for the setting studied here: some behavior requires memory or bounded multi-step procedures, and a correct action rule may still lack an explicit account of the mechanism that makes it correct. We therefore treat the policy as one component of a larger explicit behavioral model. LLM agents can revise behavior from rollouts, execution traces and failed attempts. Prior work has explored reflection, self-feedback, executable skill repair, policy-code generation and reward-code generation [1–6]. We use this ability as an editing backend, but select edits with score, QA and executable world-model validation rather than with task reward alone. Score measures task outcome, whereas many failures are mechanistic: the agent may misidentify a hazard, misunderstand a reward source, choose an action with the wrong consequence or follow a route that only works under the original dynamics. QA probes these mechanisms in language, and world-model checks test whether mechanism memory predicts symbolic consequences under state-action interventions. 

# 3 Problem Formulation 

At iteration t, the agent is an ESBM 

Mt = (Σ , Φt, Πt, K t, O t), (1) where Σ is the symbolic vocabulary, Φ t maps observations and memory to facts, Π t

maps facts to actions or option calls, Kt is executable mechanism memory, and Ot is a bounded option library. Given observation ot and memory mt, execution is 

zt = Φ t(ot, m t, K t), ut = Π t(zt), at, m t+1 = Execute( ut, o t, m t, O t). (2) The loop summarizes the information available for revision as 

St = {Mt, E t, D t, Q t, H t, U t}, (3) 4ESBM Learning: Challenger--Optimizer Loop adaptive QA active probes typed edits verifier-gated Current ESBM predicates (typed facts) rules (causal graph) options (skills / routes) S(t) A(t) s(t+1) mechanisms (transitions) policy + mechanism memory Challenger ↔ Optimizer Loop 12 35evidence repair accepted update Challenger • asks hard QA • branches probes • finds gaps probe pressure ESBM gaps missing predicate wrong rule ? uncertain mechanism evidence trajectory evidence QA error ?branch outcome Optimizer • typed edits • repairs rules • updates mechanisms repair proposal Verifier gate (referee) validate accept reject protect regressions challenge next round Task Rollouts Kangaroo Seaquest Kingkong Other games 

Runtime Use object state symbolic facts action / option trace + metrics Validation Signals task score evidence-linked QA passive replay active branch rollback Updated ESBM Accepted ESBM predicates rules options mechanism memory S(t) A(t) S(t+1) mechanism predictor S(t) A(t) S(t+1) auditable diffs explicit answers symbolic executor Fig. 2 ESBM architecture with a Challenger–Optimizer training loop. The current ESBM executes as both a policy and an explicit mechanism model. Rollout evidence, QA mistakes and transition errors drive a challenger that applies adaptive questions and active world-model probes to expose missing predicates, incorrect rules and uncertain mechanisms. The optimizer responds with typed symbolic edits, which are filtered by a verifier gate before becoming accepted ESBM updates for the next training round. 

where Et contains rollouts, scores, reward events, deaths, selected rules, predicates and object positions; Dt is the recent ESBM diff; Qt is QA history; Ht is transition-prediction history; and Ut is uncertain or contradictory mechanism memory. Let G(M ) denote original-environment score. Given an adaptive QA benchmark Bt

and a world-model probe suite Pt, A(M, Bt) measures evidence-supported QA accu-racy, whereas Wpassive (M, Pt) and Wactive (M, Pt) measure passive replay and active branch prediction accuracy. Score-only learning primarily maximizes G(M ); our goal is to learn ESBMs that improve score together with QA accuracy and executable world-model accuracy. Recovery under mechanism changes is then evaluated as a separate continuation setting, where the pre-change ESBM keeps optimizing after the changed mechanism is revealed through new interaction. Figure 2 summarizes the resulting architecture. The loop is adversarial in what it tests but constructive in what it accepts: the challenger turns rollout evidence and model errors into questions and active probes, the optimizer proposes typed local repairs to the ESBM, and a verifier gate accepts only updates that improve a validated dimension without violating protected regressions. 54 Explicit Symbolic Behavioral Model 

An ESBM is the optimization object of the loop: an editable symbolic model that exe-cutes as a policy and also predicts abstract consequences of actions. The LLM is not the learned policy; it proposes local ESBM edits that are accepted only through vali-dation. At runtime, Φ converts the raw observation and memory into symbolic facts, Π selects a primitive action or option call, O executes bounded multi-step procedures, and K predicts how relevant symbolic state variables should change. Thus the policy is only one part of the model; the mechanism memory is the executable understanding layer that can be queried and repaired. The same ESBM is used in three modes. For policy execution, the agent maps observation and memory to symbolic facts, selects a primitive action or bounded option, and updates memory after the option or action terminates. For question answering, the model exposes approved context from predicates, rules, options, mech-anisms and selected trajectories, allowing an answerer to reason over explicit model content rather than hidden policy state. For world-model probing, K receives a sym-bolic state and action sequence and predicts events, object changes, reward changes and terminal consequences. These modes share the same editable model, so a correc-tion to a predicate, rule, option or mechanism can change behavior and understanding together. Formally, at environment step k, the abstraction layer produces symbolic facts and the rule layer scores primitive actions and option calls: 

zk = Φ( ok, m k, K ), (4) 

s(u | zk) = X

> r∈Π

wr 1{body( r) ⊆ zk}1{head( r) = u}, (5) 

uk = arg max  

> u∈A∪ O

s(u | zk). (6) Here A is the primitive action set, O is the option library, and each rule contributes only when its body is satisfied by the current symbolic facts. The state abstraction Φ is represented by typed predicates. Each predicate specifies typed variables, structured conditions and an output fact. Conditions include visibil-ity, object attributes, spatial relations, distance thresholds, region membership and memory predicates. The rule policy Π is a set of weighted clauses whose bodies are symbolic facts and whose heads are primitive actions or option calls. A rule stores its action, priority, weight, provenance and supporting or failing trajectories. This makes a behavioral change local: a rollout failure can be traced to a missing predicate, an over-broad condition, an incorrect action head or a bad weight. Options allow the model to express behavior that should not be flattened into one-step rules. An option has typed inputs, preconditions, read/write memory fields, a termination condition, a maximum step bound and verifier checks. It may implement a short route, an interception routine or a bounded rescue sequence, but it cannot become unrestricted policy code because it must expose its contract and terminate within the declared bound. 6Mechanism memory K stores executable transition hypotheses. A mechanism con-tains trigger conditions, an action scope, predicted events, reward and life deltas, player-motion deltas, object deltas, confidence and trajectory evidence. Given symbolic state z and an action or action sequence α, the mechanism layer predicts 

K(z, α ) → (ˆ e, ∆ˆ z, ∆ˆ r, ∆ˆl), (7) where ˆ e denotes symbolic events, ∆ˆ z object and relation changes, ∆ˆ r reward change and ∆ ˆl life or terminal-state change. This design makes understanding testable: the same mechanism entry can answer a QA item and can also be checked against a branched environment transition. 

# 5 Policy-adaptive QA and active world-model probes 

The challenger is a probe generator conditioned on the current ESBM state. Its input is not only the latest trajectory, but also the current model version, recent symbolic diff, failure windows, reward events, deaths or stuck states, behavioral regressions, previous QA mistakes, uncertain mechanism entries and transition-prediction errors. Its output is a set of grounded QA items and active world-model probes that target concepts the current ESBM appears not to understand. We write this generation step as (Bt, Pt) = C(St), (8) where C is the challenger, Bt is the adaptive QA set and Pt is the active world-model probe suite for the current ESBM state St.The conditioning signals are chosen to make the benchmark policy-adaptive rather than static. Failure traces generate diagnosis questions about observed deaths, missed rewards or stuck behavior; symbolic diffs test whether a recent edit created a blind spot; previous QA mistakes focus new questions on concepts the model failed to sup-port; transition errors select states where the mechanism layer predicts incorrectly; mechanism uncertainty probes missing or contradictory entries in K; and controlled environment modifications generate counterfactual and recovery probes. The detailed signal taxonomy is reported in the Supplementary Information. QA items cover world structure, factual recognition, game mechanics, mechanis-tic reasoning, scoring and hazards, routes and strategy, and counterfactual reasoning. Each item stores a question, answer format, gold answer, target concept, model ver-sion and grounding evidence. Gold answers are accepted only when grounded in a trajectory event, a verified environment branch, an accepted mechanism entry or a declared environment modification. A separate answerer then receives the question and approved ESBM context: selected predicate and rule summaries, option contracts, mechanism entries, trajectory snippets and optional modification descriptions. It does not receive the challenger’s hidden rationale or the gold answer. The answerer returns a structured answer with supporting evidence identifiers. QA scoring checks both answer correctness and evidence support, so an answer that is correct but unsupported by the ESBM context is marked as partial or failed. 7For a question bi ∈ B t, let ci(M ) indicate answer correctness and ei(M ) indicate whether the answer is supported by approved ESBM evidence. The benchmark score is 

A(M, Bt) = 1

|B t|

X

> bi∈B t

ci(M )ei(M ). (9) Active world-model probes test K as an abstract simulator. From a checkpointed environment state, the system chooses a short action sequence and runs it in two branches. The real branch steps the environment and extracts observed symbolic events and final facts. The abstract branch applies K to the same initial symbolic state and action sequence. The verifier compares predicted and observed events, reward changes, life changes, player motion and object changes. Action sequences come from three sources: observed failure windows, local counterfactuals that replace one or a few actions, and mechanism-targeted probes aimed at uncertain or contradictory entries in K.For an active probe pi = ( si, z i, α i) with environment checkpoint si, symbolic state 

zi and action sequence αi, let X extract symbolic outcomes from the real environment. Active world-model accuracy is 

Wactive (M, Pt) = 1

|P t|

X

> pi∈P t

1{d(K(zi, α i), X (T (si, α i))) ≤ ϵ}, (10) where T is the environment transition function and d compares predicted and observed symbolic outcomes. Passive replay and active branching play different roles. Passive replay checks whether mechanism memory explains transitions already recorded in trajectories. Active branching checks whether the mechanism memory can predict consequences under selected interventions from a matched checkpoint. The second test is stricter because it prevents the model from merely rationalizing observed data after the fact. 

# 6 Joint ESBM optimization 

Learning proceeds through repeated local edits to the ESBM. The optimizer may add or revise predicates, rule conditions, action heads, rule weights, bounded options or mechanism entries. Each proposed edit is evaluated as a candidate model rather than as a free-form explanation. The validation vector is 

V (M ) =  G(M ), A (M ), W passive (M ), W active (M ), (11) where the terms denote task performance, QA accuracy, passive transition accuracy and active branch accuracy. No single scalar is treated as a complete proxy for success. For a proposed update M ′ 

> t

, we compare it with the current accepted model by ∆Vt = V (M ′ 

> t

) − V (Mt). (12) 8With improvement thresholds τ and protected-regression tolerances ρ, the default acceptance condition is 

∃j : ∆ Vt,j ≥ τj and ∀k : ∆ Vt,k ≥ − ρk. (13) Mechanism repairs and nondominated held-out improvements are handled as explicit exceptions to this default rule. The acceptance rule is thresholded rather than purely scalar. A candidate is accept-able if it improves at least one validated dimension while staying within regression tolerances on protected dimensions, repairs a verified mechanism error without mak-ing behavior nonviable, or becomes nondominated when evaluated on held-out probes. This permits a mechanism-only correction to enter the model even before it produces an immediate score gain, while still preventing ungrounded explanations from being accepted. The full optimization pseudocode is reported in Algorithm 1 in the Supple-mentary Information. Modified-environment recovery is not part of this per-iteration acceptance vector; it is evaluated by continuing the same Challenger–Optimizer loop after a controlled mechanism change and measuring how quickly the model adapts. 

# 7 Experiments 

The experiments are designed to answer four research questions: 

• RQ1: Can ESBM achieve competitive task performance rather than only producing interpretable explanations? 

• RQ2: Does ESBM encode explicit game understanding that can be queried and supported by model evidence? 

• RQ3: Does the mechanism layer form an executable world model that predicts held-out and counterfactual symbolic dynamics? 

• RQ4: Does explicit game understanding improve recovery after controlled mecha-nism changes? The main comparison uses three Atari-style JAXAtari games with distinct mecha-nisms: kangaroo for route planning and hazards, seaquest for oxygen and rescue mechanics, and kingkong for route adaptation and timing. Scores on additional games, including pong , are reported in the appendix as broader ESBM score context. The external reference methods are DQN and PPO as model-free score-optimizing base-lines, NUDGE as a neurally guided differentiable logic policy learner, and BlendRL as a hybrid neural-symbolic policy learner [12–15]. 

7.1 Experimental setup 

Each main experiment corresponds to one research question and is reported on 

kangaroo , seaquest and kingkong . Additional game scores and protocol details are reported in the appendix. All ESBM variants use the same rollout budget, LLM budget and maximum model-update iterations within each game. 9Table 1 Capability overview. A check mark indicates that the capability is part of the method design; a circle indicates partial or indirect support. EvoSymbol ∗ is the score-only self-evolving symbolic reference used in RQ1. 

Variant Score Explicit policy Agentic edits Adaptive QA Exec. WM Joint val. DQN [12] ✓ × × × × ×

PPO [13] ✓ × × × × ×

NUDGE [14] ✓ ✓ × × × ×

BlendRL [15] ✓ ◦ × × ◦ ×

EvoSymbol ∗ ✓ ✓ ✓ × × ×

ESBM ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓      

> Table 2 Task score. Values are mean ±s.d. over evaluation seeds when available. Strict same-wrapper comparison is limited to PPO, EvoSymbol and ESBM; DQN, NUDGE and BlendRL provide external score references, with the kingkong BlendRL entry using a local semantic adapter because the official BlendRL benchmark reports DonkeyKong rather than this setting.

Agent Task score Method Type kangaroo seaquest kingkong 

DQN model-free 2,696 2,794 1,638.5 ± 273.8 PPO model-free 3,800 524 ± 8.94 1,250 ± 495 NUDGE logic-guided 3,058 ± 25 64 ± 0 866 ± 56 BlendRL hybrid 12,619 ± 132 4,204 ± 10 858.0 ± 379.2 EvoSymbol ∗ score-only 96,800 ± 0 8,442 ± 1,509 1,426 ± 503 

ESBM explicit 104,010 ± 32 11,716 ± 3,715 2,726 ± 977 

> ∗

EvoSymbol is a score-only self-evolving symbolic agent without adaptive QA or executable world-model validation. 

7.2 Competitive task performance 

To answer RQ1, we compare the full ESBM with model-free, neuro-symbolic and score-only symbolic references. DQN, NUDGE and BlendRL provide external raw-score references where official or adapter-based results are available, whereas PPO, EvoSymbol and ESBM form the strict same-wrapper comparison. EvoSymbol isolates score-only symbolic self-evolution without QA or world-model validation. The main metric is mean game score over seeds; protocol details and external-reference settings are reported in the appendix. Within this mixed reference table, ESBM is the strongest reported entry on all three primary games. The strict same-wrapper comparison is between PPO, EvoSym-bol and ESBM; EvoSymbol is also strong on kangaroo , but it separates score-only symbolic self-evolution from the QA- and world-model-validated ESBM objective. 10 Table 3 Explicit understanding. Values are policy-only answerability scores on evidence-linked QA. Cell shading highlights stronger evidence-supported understanding; Unknown is reverse-coded because lower values indicate fewer unresolved answers.                          

> Evidence-supported answerability Evidence audit Game Overall Factual Mech. CF Coverage Unknown
> kangaroo 0.949 0.938 0.949 0.957 0.739 0.007
> seaquest 0.732 0.808 0.698 0.786 0.593 0.046
> kingkong 0.855 0.900 0.832 0.947 0.671 0.071

7.3 Explicit game understanding 

To answer RQ2, we freeze each accepted ESBM and evaluate it on a held-out game-understanding benchmark covering world structure, factual recognition, game mechanics, scoring and hazards, routes and strategy, and counterfactual reasoning. An answer is counted as evidence-supported only if the supporting predicate, rule, option, mechanism entry or trajectory evidence can be identified. Table 3 therefore reports ESBM’s evidence-linked answerability and audit fields, rather than treating methods without an explicit symbolic answer interface as failed QA respondents. The resulting QA scores show that the accepted ESBMs retain queryable evidence for most held-out understanding questions, with lower coverage on seaquest and 

kingkong marking where the symbolic model remains less complete. 

7.4 Executable world-model prediction 

To answer RQ3, we test whether ESBM mechanisms form an executable abstract world model. Starting from matched environment checkpoints, we execute the same action sequence in the real environment and in the ESBM mechanism layer. The pre-diction target includes symbolic next-state facts, object changes, collision and reward events, resource changes, life changes and terminal outcomes. The main metric is deliberately change-conditioned: static fields and unchanged objects are excluded so that trivial persistence does not appear strong by predicting no change. We compare ESBM with persistence, constant-dynamics and decision-tree world-model baselines under the same probe protocol. Across games, ESBM outperforms persistence, constant-dynamics and decision-tree world-model baselines under the reported symbolic probe protocol on both observed transitions and active counterfactual branches. The lower absolute values on 

kingkong reflect the harder timing and moving-hazard dynamics rather than a missing probe protocol. 

7.5 Recovery after mechanism changes 

To answer RQ4, we test whether models recover after the modified mechanism is revealed through new interaction. The frozen modified-environment score r0 is used only as the starting point for recovery, not as a separate main result. PPO continues gradient-based training in the modified environment, whereas ESBM continues the Challenger–Optimizer loop from the same pre-modification model. The main shifts are 11 Table 4 World-model prediction. Values are means ± s.d. under the online, data-budget-matched RQ3 protocol. Event F1 is micro-F1 over positive symbolic event labels. CF denotes restored counterfactual-branch change prediction under matched active probes; eligible target counts and denominator rules are reported in Table S6.                                                                    

> Observed-transition prediction Active probe Game Model Fields Event F1 Rewards Hazards CF branch
> kangaroo
> Persistence 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 Const. dynamics 0.18 ±0.04 0.61 ±0.06 0.10 ±0.05 0.08 ±0.03 0.06 ±0.03 Decision-tree WM 0.38 ±0.07 0.74 ±0.05 0.34 ±0.08 0.29 ±0.07 0.21 ±0.06
> ESBM 0.72 ±0.05 0.84 ±0.04 0.71 ±0.06 0.68 ±0.06 0.61 ±0.07
> seaquest
> Persistence 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 Const. dynamics 0.15 ±0.03 0.58 ±0.07 0.36 ±0.06 0.06 ±0.03 0.07 ±0.03 Decision-tree WM 0.29 ±0.06 0.70 ±0.06 0.42 ±0.08 0.18 ±0.05 0.17 ±0.05
> ESBM 0.66 ±0.06 0.80 ±0.05 0.69 ±0.07 0.58 ±0.08 0.55 ±0.08
> kingkong
> Persistence 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 Const. dynamics 0.13 ±0.04 0.46 ±0.08 0.08 ±0.04 0.04 ±0.02 0.05 ±0.03 Decision-tree WM 0.24 ±0.06 0.63 ±0.07 0.18 ±0.06 0.12 ±0.05 0.14 ±0.05
> ESBM 0.58 ±0.08 0.74 ±0.06 0.52 ±0.09 0.43 ±0.09 0.38 ±0.10

Table 5 Mechanism-change recovery. Entries are score ratios normalized by original-environment score. Shaded cells highlight post-adaptation recovery and recovery gain after matched interaction.                              

> PPO recovery ESBM recovery Game Mechanism shift r0rK∆rr0rK∆r
> kangaroo faster monkeys 0.54 0.66 +0.12 0.71 0.94 +0.23
> seaquest faster oxygen decay 0.46 0.60 +0.14 0.65 0.90 +0.25
> kingkong faster bombs 0.38 0.53 +0.15 0.61 0.86 +0.25

faster monkeys in kangaroo under the first-level/no-falling-coconut protocol, faster oxygen decay in seaquest , and faster bombs in first-level kingkong . Both methods receive the same post-modification interaction budget and are evaluated on the same seed set. For each method, M0 denotes that method’s pre-modification model. We report 

rK = Gmod (MK )

Gorig (M0) , ∆r = rK − r0, (14) where MK is the recovered model after the matched post-modification budget. The recovery experiment therefore treats mechanism change as continued adap-tation, not as another term in the per-iteration validation vector. ESBM recovers a larger fraction of the original score than PPO in all three controlled shifts. 

# 8 Related Work 

8.1 Reflection-based LLM agents and program editing 

Reflection and self-feedback methods show that language agents can use task feed-back or self-generated critique to improve behavior [1, 2]. Executable skill repair and language-to-code control systems show that LLMs can write or revise executable poli-cies from environment feedback [3, 4]. Reward-design methods use LLMs to generate 12 reward programs for reinforcement learning [5, 6]. These works motivate our optimizer, but they do not by themselves answer how to turn mechanism understanding into a policy-selection signal. In our setting, the LLM is a backend that proposes edits to an explicit model; the training signal comes from score, QA, and executable world-model validation. 

8.2 Self-evolving agent curricula 

Self-evolving agent frameworks reduce dependence on human-curated data by generat-ing training tasks from the model’s own frontier. Agent0 co-evolves a curriculum agent and an executor agent from the same base LLM, using tool-integrated reasoning so that a stronger executor pressures the curriculum agent to produce harder tool-aware tasks [7]. This is related to our challenger–optimizer organization, but differs in both the optimization target and the validation object. Agent0 primarily improves a latent LLM agent through self-generated curricula. ESBM instead edits an explicit behav-ioral model in an interactive environment: the challenger generates evidence-grounded QA and active transition probes, and these probes become validation constraints over predicate, rule, option and mechanism edits. 

8.3 World-understanding evaluation 

Diagnostic QA and adversarial evaluation probe whether models can answer questions about objects, relations and reasoning cases beyond aggregate task success [9, 11, 16]. For interactive agents, QA-style probes are useful because task success can hide mechanistic misunderstandings, a failure mode related to shortcut learning in high-performing models [17]. Our work builds on this view but moves QA from post-hoc evaluation into the learning loop. The generated questions are conditioned on the current model’s failures, and QA accuracy is considered during ESBM selection. 

8.4 World models and transition prediction 

World-model and model-based reinforcement-learning approaches learn predictive models of environment dynamics for planning or policy improvement [18–21]. Our mechanism memory has a narrower but more inspectable role: it predicts symbolic events and state changes from symbolic state and action. The active validation pro-tocol also differs from passive next-state prediction. It branches the real environment and the abstract ESBM world model from matched checkpoints under the same action sequence, then compares predicted and observed symbolic consequences. This makes mechanism memory an executable object that can be repaired, audited, and rejected when it contradicts observed dynamics. 

8.5 Dynamic and adversarial benchmarks 

Dynamic and adversarial benchmarks challenge models with examples designed against current failures [8–11]. Our benchmark is similarly adversarial, but it is condi-tioned on a changing ESBM rather than only on a frozen model. Generated questions 13 and transition probes target rollout failures, recent symbolic edits, historical QA mistakes, and uncertain mechanism entries. 

8.6 Programmatic and symbolic policy learning 

Programmatic and symbolic reinforcement learning aims to produce interpretable poli-cies [14, 15, 22]. Kintsugi further frames symbolic-agent improvement as verifier-gated knowledge-base induction: learned policy content is stored in YAML knowledge bases and updated through typed KBDiff operations applied by a proposer–applier–verifier loop [23]. This is close to our use of typed local edits and verifier-gated acceptance. The difference is that ESBM treats the symbolic policy as only one part of a broader behavioral model. In our setting, predicates, rules and options are optimized together with evidence-grounded QA and active transition probes, so accepted edits can be con-nected not only to changed behavior but also to explicit answerability and executable mechanism consistency. 

# 9 Limitations 

The framework depends on the quality of generated probes. Poorly grounded or repet-itive QA can create noise, and QA accuracy may not always correlate with game score. Active world-model validation also requires reliable checkpointing, symbolic state extraction, and action-sequence selection; a failed checkpoint replay can reduce usable probe coverage. Generator-answerer leakage must be controlled carefully. The symbolic vocabulary limits what the ESBM can express, and the option interface must remain bounded to avoid turning the model into unrestricted policy code. The current experiments isolate score-only symbolic self-evolution through EvoSymbol, but they are not a complete factorial ablation of every acceptance-rule component. Finally, the current setting uses Atari-style games as a controlled testbed; transferring the method to robotics or open-ended environments requires richer state abstraction and stronger verifiers. 

# 10 Conclusion 

We introduced ESBM learning with adaptive questions and active world-model probes for learning explicit behavioral models in interactive environments. The method trains an ESBM that contains predicates, rules, options, and executable mechanism memory, rather than optimizing a standalone policy. A challenger generates grounded QA and active world-model probes from current failures, and an optimizer edits the ESBM under a multi-criterion acceptance rule that includes understanding checks. By mak-ing mechanism understanding executable and tied to policy updates, the framework separates high-score behavior from symbolically verifiable mechanism knowledge and provides a concrete mechanism for exposing brittle reward gains. 14 References 

[1] Shinn, N., Cassano, F., Gopinath, A., Narasimhan, K., Yao, S.: Reflexion: Lan-guage agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems 36 , 8634–8652 (2023) [2] Madaan, A., Tandon, N., Gupta, P., Hallinan, S., Gao, L., Wiegreffe, S., Alon, U., Dziri, N., Prabhumoye, S., Yang, Y., et al. : Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 , 46534– 46594 (2023) [3] Wang, G., Xie, Y., Jiang, Y., Mandlekar, A., Xiao, C., Zhu, Y., Fan, L., Anand-kumar, A.: Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 (2023) [4] Liang, J., Huang, W., Xia, F., Xu, P., Hausman, K., Ichter, B., Florence, P., Zeng, A.: Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9493–9500 (2023). IEEE [5] Ma, Y.J., Liang, W., Wang, G., Huang, D.-A., Bastani, O., Jayaraman, D., Zhu, Y., Fan, J., et al. : Eureka: Human-level reward design via coding large language models. In: International Conference on Learning Representations, vol. 2024, pp. 26516–26560 (2024) [6] Xie, T., Zhao, S., Wu, C., Liu, Y., Luo, Q., Zhong, V., Yang, Y., Yu, T.: Text2reward: Reward shaping with language models for reinforcement learn-ing. In: International Conference on Learning Representations, vol. 2024, pp. 35663–35699 (2024) [7] Xia, P., Zeng, K., Liu, J., Qin, C., Wu, F., Zhou, Y., Xiong, C., Yao, H.: Agent0: Unleashing self-evolving agents from zero data via tool-integrated reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16043 (2025) [8] Kiela, D., Bartolo, M., Nie, Y., Kaushik, D., Geiger, A., Wu, Z., Vidgen, B., Prasad, G., Singh, A., Ringshia, P., et al. : Dynabench: Rethinking benchmarking in nlp. In: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 4110–4124 (2021) [9] Bartolo, M., Roberts, A., Welbl, J., Riedel, S., Stenetorp, P.: Beat the ai: Inves-tigating adversarial human annotation for reading comprehension. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 8, 662–678 (2020) [10] Nie, Y., Williams, A., Dinan, E., Bansal, M., Weston, J., Kiela, D.: Adversarial nli: A new benchmark for natural language understanding. In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 15 4885–4901 (2020) [11] Sheng, S., Singh, A., Goswami, V., Magana, J., Thrush, T., Galuba, W., Parikh, D., Kiela, D.: Human-adversarial visual question answering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 , 20346–20359 (2021) [12] Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A.A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M.G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A.K., Ostrovski, G., et al. : Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. nature 518 (7540), 529–533 (2015) [13] Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., Klimov, O.: Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 (2017) [14] Delfosse, Q., Shindo, H., Dhami, D., Kersting, K.: Interpretable and explain-able logical policies via neurally guided symbolic abstraction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 , 50838–50858 (2023) [15] Shindo, H., Delfosse, Q., Dhami, D.S., Kersting, K.: Blendrl: A framework for merging symbolic and neural policy learning. In: International Conference on Learning Representations, vol. 2025, pp. 3615–3646 (2025) [16] Johnson, J., Hariharan, B., Van Der Maaten, L., Fei-Fei, L., Lawrence Zitnick, C., Girshick, R.: Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and ele-mentary visual reasoning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2901–2910 (2017) [17] Geirhos, R., Jacobsen, J.-H., Michaelis, C., Zemel, R., Brendel, W., Bethge, M., Wichmann, F.A.: Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature Machine Intelligence 2(11), 665–673 (2020) [18] Sutton, R.S.: Dyna, an integrated architecture for learning, planning, and reacting. ACM Sigart Bulletin 2(4), 160–163 (1991) [19] Ha, D., Schmidhuber, J.: Recurrent world models facilitate policy evolution. Advances in neural information processing systems 31 (2018) [20] Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Hubert, T., Simonyan, K., Sifre, L., Schmitt, S., Guez, A., Lockhart, E., Hassabis, D., Graepel, T., et al. : Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature 588 (7839), 604–609 (2020) [21] Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Norouzi, M., Ba, J.: Mastering atari with discrete world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02193 (2020) [22] Verma, A., Murali, V., Singh, R., Kohli, P., Chaudhuri, S.: Programmatically interpretable reinforcement learning. In: International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5045–5054 (2018). PMLR [23] Cao, T., Deng, Y., Shindo, H., Delfosse, Q., Wen, L., Wang, S., Bl¨ uml, J., 16 Tauchmann, C., Kersting, K.: Kintsugi: Learning policies by repairing executable knowledge bases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.09487 (2026) 17 A Supplementary Information 

A.1 ESBM schema summary 

The Explicit Symbolic Behavioral Model (ESBM) is the editable optimization object used throughout the study. It contains typed state abstractions, executable policy rules, bounded options and mechanism memory. The main text defines the model as 

M = (Σ , Φ, Π, K, O ), (15) where Σ is the symbolic vocabulary, Φ maps observations and memory into symbolic facts, Π maps facts into primitive actions or option calls, K stores executable mech-anism knowledge, and O stores bounded options. The appendix gives a component schema summary used to interpret the experimental artifacts. 

Supplementary Table S1 ESBM schema. Components define the symbolic vocabulary, abstraction, policy, options and mechanism memory used by the verifier during QA and world-model checks.                                            

> Component Contents Validation role ΣEntity types, object roles, region names, action names and symbolic fact names Checks whether generated predicates and questions refer to valid concepts ΦTyped predicates with struc-tured conditions over observations, objects, memory and mechanism facts Determines whether observations are con-verted into stable policy-relevant facts ΠWeighted rules mapping facts to primitive actions or option calls Determines action selection and links behav-ior changes to local symbolic diffs
> OBounded option contracts with explicit inputs, termination condi-tions and allowed actions Represents temporally extended behavior without unrestricted policy code
> KMechanism entries, transition predictors, event predictors and natural-language rationales Predicts symbolic consequences for QA and active world-model validation

Predicate entries. 

Each predicate entry specifies a name, typed variables, structured conditions and an output fact. Conditions include visibility, object attributes, spatial relations, distance thresholds, region membership, memory predicates and mechanism-derived facts. A predicate is accepted only if it type-checks, can be evaluated on stored trajectories and improves at least one validated dimension without violating protected regressions. 

Rule entries. 

Each rule stores its action head, priority, weight, required facts, forbidden facts, prove-nance, supporting trajectories and failing trajectories. At runtime, all satisfied rules contribute scores to primitive actions or option calls. Rule edits include adding a rule, 18 Supplementary Table S2 Probe signals. Each signal selects a different source of pressure for QA generation or active world-model validation in each update round.        

> Signal Role in probe generation
> Failure trace Generates diagnosis questions about observed deaths, missed rewards, stalled states and repeated wrong actions
> Symbolic diff Tests whether a recent predicate, rule, option or mechanism edit intro-duced a new blind spot
> QA mistakes Focuses new questions on concepts that the current model failed to answer with evidence
> Transition errors Selects states and action windows where the executable world model predicts incorrectly
> Mechanism uncertainty Probes missing, low-confidence or contradictory mechanism entries in
> K
> Environment modifica-tion
> Generates counterfactual and recovery probes under declared mecha-nism changes

deleting a rule, changing a condition, changing an action head, and adjusting a priority or weight. 

Option entries. 

Options represent bounded procedures that may require short-horizon memory, repeated actions or local search. An option must declare its inputs, allowed primi-tive actions, termination condition, timeout and failure condition. Options are not unrestricted task solutions: they are executable subroutines whose preconditions and outcomes remain visible to the ESBM validator. 

Mechanism entries. 

Mechanism memory contains executable predictions and natural-language rationales. The executable part maps a symbolic state and an action or action sequence to pre-dicted events, object changes, reward changes and life changes. The rationale part explains why the transition is expected and which trajectories support it. A mech-anism entry may improve QA accuracy before it improves score, but it must pass passive replay or active branch validation before it is treated as reliable. 

A.2 Adaptive QA benchmark design 

The adaptive QA benchmark is generated from the current ESBM state rather than from a fixed question list. Its purpose is to expose model-specific blind spots and to produce reusable tests of environment understanding. Questions are generated from rollout failures, high-value events, recent symbolic edits, previous QA mistakes, uncertain mechanism entries and active world-model discrepancies. 

Question generation. 

For each iteration, the challenger receives the current model summary, recent rollout traces, accepted and rejected diffs, QA history and mechanism-validation history. It proposes questions with a target concept, answer format, gold answer, difficulty esti-mate and grounding evidence. A generated question is retained only if its gold answer 19 Supplementary Table S3 QA categories. Categories define the target ability and the evidence used to ground generated answers during held-out evaluation.                            

> Category Target ability Typical grounding evidence
> World structure Entities, roles, regions and persis-tent spatial layout Object lists, region definitions and sta-ble layout observations
> Factual recognition Entity descriptions, object roles and visible state facts Trajectory frames and symbolic state snapshots
> Game mechanics Interaction rules, transition dynamics and resource behavior State-action-next-state transitions
> Scoring and haz-ards
> Reward sources, failure causes and danger-aware items Reward events, death events and hazard contacts
> Routes and strat-egy
> Subgoals, high-value paths and route abstractions Successful and failed trajectory seg-ments
> Counterfactual rea-soning
> Consequences under modified assumptions or action changes Verified branches and declared environ-ment modifications

is grounded in a trajectory event, a verified active branch, an accepted mechanism entry or a declared environment modification. 

Question answering. 

The answerer receives the question and approved ESBM context: selected predicate summaries, rule summaries, option contracts, mechanism entries, trajectory snippets and optional environment-modification descriptions. It does not receive the chal-lenger’s hidden rationale or the gold answer. The answerer returns a structured answer and evidence identifiers. QA scoring checks answer correctness and whether the answer is supported by the provided ESBM context. 

A.3 Active world-model probes 

Active world-model probes test whether mechanism memory can predict symbolic consequences under interventions. A probe begins from a matched checkpoint ( si, z i), where si is the environment state and zi is the ESBM symbolic state. The same action sequence is applied to the real environment and to the abstract ESBM world model: 

si+k = T (si, a i:i+k), ˆzi+k = K(zi, a i:i+k). (16) The validator compares observed and predicted symbolic events, object positions, reward changes, life changes and resource changes. 

A.4 RQ3 metric construction and baselines 

The RQ3 world-model results in Table 4 are computed from the final accepted ESBM artifacts for the three primary games. For each game and seed, we first collect evalua-tion rollouts under the same 20,000-frame cap used for score reporting. The validator then builds two probe sets. Passive probes are held-out state-action windows from recorded trajectories. Active probes restore a matched environment checkpoint and execute an observed, counterfactual, policy or mixed action sequence in both the 20 Supplementary Table S4 Active branches. Sequence families define how action branches are constructed and what causal property they test in the ESBM world model. 

Sequence family Construction Purpose 

Observed replay Reuse an action segment from a real trajectory Tests whether K can reproduce known dynamics 

Local counterfactual Change one or a few actions near a failure or reward event Tests causal sensitivity around important events 

Policy branch Follow the current ESBM policy from a stored checkpoint Tests whether model predictions match its own behavior distribution 

Mixed branch Combine observed prefixes with counterfactual suffixes Tests generalization beyond the exact recorded rollout 

Supplementary Table S5 World-model metrics. Each metric is scored only on eligible probe targets, so unchanged fields and unavailable branch replays do not create trivial successes. 

Metric Eligible target Correct prediction 

Fields Symbolic scalar or relational fields that change within the probe window Predicted final value matches the extracted final symbolic value 

Event F1 Positive non-bookkeeping event labels emitted by the extractor and the mecha-nism layer Micro-F1 between predicted and observed positive event labels 

Rewards Windows with non-zero reward change or declared reward-relevant mechanism triggers Predicted reward delta matches the observed reward delta within the declared tolerance 

Hazards Windows involving hazard contact, avoidance, life loss or terminal-risk mechanisms Predicted hazard, life or terminal consequence matches the observed outcome 

CF branch Restored active branches with a valid checkpoint and a non-empty changed tar-get set Aggregate changed-target prediction over the restored branch is correct 

Supplementary Table S6 RQ3 denominators. Counts are totals across evaluation seeds after excluding static fields, empty event windows and failed checkpoint restores; parentheses report the mean eligible count per seed. 

Game Seeds Passive Active Fields Event labels Rewards Hazards 

kangaroo 5 1,280 (256) 150 (30) 3,920 (784) 562 (112) 457 (91) 543 (109) 

seaquest 5 1,280 (256) 148 (30) 5,940 (1,188) 842 (168) 711 (142) 538 (108) 

kingkong 5 1,280 (256) 142 (28) 6,210 (1,242) 1,036 (207) 486 (97) 672 (134) 

real environment and the ESBM mechanism layer. Scores are computed per seed and reported as mean ± s.d. across seeds. The event-F1 column is evaluated from explicit symbolic event predictions rather than inferred from the reward or hazard columns. Typical event labels include reward collection, hazard contact, rescue or resource events, object removal, projectile interac-tions and terminal or life-loss events, depending on the game. True no-event negatives do not contribute to this micro-F1 score. If a probe does not emit an eligible target for a metric, that probe is excluded from that metric’s denominator rather than being counted as either a success or a failure. 21 Supplementary Table S7 Typed edits. Each edit type has execution, grounding or regression checks that prevent unsupported symbolic changes from entering the accepted model.                             

> Edit type Examples Required checks
> Predicate edit Add, remove or change a typed pred-icate condition Type check, replay evaluation and regression check
> Rule edit Add, remove or reweight arule; change an action head Runtime execution, score validation and protected behavior check
> Option edit Add or change a bounded option con-tract Timeout, termination, action-set and rollback checks
> Mechanism edit Add or revise event or transition pre-dictions Passive replay or active branch vali-dation
> QA edit Add generated QA item or revise held-out split Gold grounding, leakage check and coverage check

Table S6 reports the denominators used for the mean scores in Table 4. Field targets are individual changed symbolic fields, event-label targets are positive non-bookkeeping event labels, reward targets are non-zero reward or resource changes, and hazard targets are changed hazard, life-loss or terminal-risk facts. Active-branch denominators count restored branches with at least one changed target; failed restores and empty branches are excluded before any model is scored. All baselines and ESBM are evaluated on exactly the same eligible targets for a given game and seed. All RQ3 baselines use the same symbolic state, action and probe budget available to the ESBM validator. The persistence baseline copies the initial symbolic state forward and predicts no events, no reward change and no hazard change; because static fields are excluded, it is a check against trivial no-change prediction. The constant-dynamics baseline predicts the most frequent observed transition, event, reward and hazard outcome for each game and action class from the training windows. The decision-tree world model is trained on the same symbolic state-action windows, using symbolic facts and action identifiers as features, and is evaluated on the held-out passive windows and restored active branches without access to their outcomes. This keeps the comparison data-budget matched while separating executable mechanism memory from generic symbolic transition fitting. 

A.5 ESBM optimization and version control 

Each accepted ESBM version is stored as a complete policy artifact plus a diff from the previous accepted version. Candidate updates may modify predicates, rules, options and mechanisms. The optimizer may use rollout failures, QA failures and transition-prediction failures as evidence. The candidate is accepted if it improves at least one validated dimension, remains within regression tolerances on protected dimensions, repairs a verified mechanism error without making behavior nonviable, or becomes nondominated on held-out probes. 22 Algorithm 1 Optimization loop. Candidate updates are tested against score, QA and executable world-model signals before becoming the next accepted model for the following round. 

Require: Initial ESBM M0, rollout budget, QA budget, active-probe budget  

> 1:

for t = 0 , 1, . . . , T − 1 do  

> 2:

Run rollout with current model Mt 

> 3:

Build St from score, traces, diffs, QA mistakes, and transition errors  

> 4:

Generate QA benchmark Bt and probe suite Pt 

> 5:

Evaluate A(Mt, Bt), Wpassive (Mt, Pt), and Wactive (Mt, Pt) 

> 6:

Propose a local ESBM update M ′ 

> t
> 7:

Evaluate G(M ′ 

> t

), A(M ′ 

> t

, Bt), Wpassive (M ′ 

> t

, Pt), and Wactive (M ′ 

> t

, Pt) 

> 8:

if M ′ 

> t

improves at least one validation dimension and no protected dimension regresses beyond tolerance then  

> 9:

Accept Mt+1 ← M ′ 

> t
> 10:

else if M ′ 

> t

repairs a verified mechanism error and remains behaviorally viable 

then  

> 11:

Accept Mt+1 ← M ′ 

> t
> 12:

else if M ′ 

> t

is nondominated on the validation vector and improves held-out probes then  

> 13:

Accept Mt+1 ← M ′ 

> t
> 14:

else  

> 15:

Reject update and keep Mt+1 ← Mt 

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

end for 

Supplementary Table S8 Evaluation axes. Main-text games are evaluated on score and understanding metrics; appendix-only games are reported as ESBM score context beyond the primary comparison.                                   

> Scope Game Primary mechanism Reported metrics
> Main kangaroo Route planning, ladders, hazards and scoring objects Score, route QA, hazard QA, active branch accuracy and modified-environment score
> Main seaquest Oxygen, rescue, enemies and shooting dynamics Score, oxygen QA, rescue QA, transition accuracy and modified-environment score
> Main kingkong Route adaptation, timing and moving hazards Score, route QA, mechanism QA and modified-environment score Appendix Broader JAXAtari set Varied Atari-style mechanisms Reported ESBM scores across addi-tional games

A.6 Experimental protocol 

All ESBM variants use the same rollout budget, LLM budget, maximum number of update iterations and random seeds within each environment. The main-text compar-ison uses three primary Atari-style JAXAtari games selected to test route planning and hazards, oxygen and rescue mechanics, and route adaptation under timing con-straints. Additional environments are reported in the appendix as ESBM score results, not as part of the main score comparison. 23 Supplementary Table S9 Additional scores. Scores are appendix-only ESBM score context at 20,000 raw frames; they are not used for the QA, world-model or recovery claims. The three primary games are omitted to avoid duplicating the main result. 

Game ESBM score Game ESBM score 

alien 290 lasergates 1,830 

asterix 96 , 600 ± 11 , 036 namethisgame 5, 070 ± 1, 096 

asteroids 4, 774 ± 2, 946 phoenix 3,080 

atlantis 56 , 820 ± 19 , 463 pong 31.0 

bankheist 4,185,308 riverraid 9,630 

bankheist no portals 70 , 632 ± 5.48 sir lancelot 5, 302 ± 8, 560 

berzerk 4, 400 ± 377 skiing 20.0 

blackjack 204 ± 4.53 slotmachine 270 ± 450 

breakout 206 spaceinvaders 1, 097 ± 670 

centipede 7, 401 ± 3, 996 spacewar 4.00 

choppercommand 22 , 540 ± 462 surround 10.0 

enduro 105 tennis 0.00 

fishingderby 103 ± 1 tetris 113 ± 23 .4

flagcapture 16 .6 ± 1.52 timepilot 12 , 460 ± 3, 210 

freeway 80.0 tron 494 ± 269 

frostbite 3, 426 ± 972 turmoil 12 , 022 ± 643 

galaxian 4,260 videocheckers 6.40 ± 3.44 

hangman 168 ± 3.36 videocube 953 

haunted house 113 , 709 ± 34 , 403 videopinball 1, 842 ± 1, 307 

human cannonball 7.00 wordzapper 105 , 058 ± 163 

klax 2, 459 ± 2, 964 

A.7 Supplementary numerical results 

This section reports the score and QA artifacts used in the main-text tables, together with ESBM scores for additional JAXAtari environments. Published DQN, NUDGE and BlendRL values in Table 2 follow the raw-score evaluation protocol reported in the BlendRL appendix where the same Atari game is available [15]. The official BlendRL Atari comparison reports kangaroo , seaquest and DonkeyKong; because our third primary game is the JAXAtari kingkong setting rather than DonkeyKong, the kingkong DQN, NUDGE and BlendRL entries use local first-level JAXAtari adapter runs. ESBM scores are evaluated under a fixed 20,000 raw-frame cap to pre-vent unbounded score accumulation in non-terminating policies, which is particularly important for kangaroo . EvoSymbol denotes score-only self-evolving symbolic-agent runs from the same score-record artifacts. Strict same-wrapper comparisons therefore remain limited to the in-protocol PPO, EvoSymbol and ESBM runs, whereas exter-nal DQN, NUDGE and BlendRL entries provide score context. The additional-game scores below are appendix-only score context; they are not used to support the RQ2– RQ4 mechanism-understanding claims and do not include the QA or world-model evaluation artifacts reported for the three primary games. 

A.8 Recovery under modified environments 

Modified environments test whether an ESBM can revise a reusable behavioral model after a mechanism change rather than only relying on the original score policy. Each modification changes a specific mechanism while preserving the task identity. The 24 Supplementary Table S10 Primary artifacts. Kangaroo uses the first-level/no-falling-coconut protocol; Kingkong uses the first-level-only protocol for score and QA reporting.                                   

> Evaluation budget Artifact outcome Game Protocol/source Seeds Steps Score QA Coverage
> kangaroo iter 013 accepted 520,000 104,010 ±32 0.949 0.739
> seaquest iter 026 accepted 520,000 11,716 ±3,715 0.732 0.593
> kingkong iter 027 accepted 520,000 2,726 ±977 0.855 0.671

Supplementary Table S11 QA accumulation. The same final QA benchmark is answered by earlier and later accepted policies to show how answerability grows over the accepted ESBM sequence.                           

> Benchmark Answerability by accepted version Net gain Game QA Start Mid Late Final Gain
> kangaroo 138 0.000 0.138 0.471 0.949 +0.949
> seaquest 194 0.000 0.180 0.701 0.732 +0.732
> kingkong 310 0.000 0.587 0.748 0.855 +0.855

Supplementary Table S12 World-model summary. Values match the ESBM rows in Table 4 for direct cross-reference with the main-text comparison.                     

> Game Fields Event F1 Rewards Hazards CF branch
> kangaroo 0.72 ±0.05 0.84 ±0.04 0.71 ±0.06 0.68 ±0.06 0.61 ±0.07
> seaquest 0.66 ±0.06 0.80 ±0.05 0.69 ±0.07 0.58 ±0.08 0.55 ±0.08
> kingkong 0.58 ±0.08 0.74 ±0.06 0.52 ±0.09 0.43 ±0.09 0.38 ±0.10

table reports the initial modified-environment score and recovery after a matched post-modification interaction budget. PPO is evaluated by the same recovery protocol, but without QA or explicit world-model metrics. Table S13 summarizes the seed counts and frame caps used for the reported ratios. 

A.9 Additional limitations 

The ESBM framework depends on reliable symbolic extraction, checkpoint replay and probe grounding. If the extractor misses important objects or if active branches cannot be replayed reliably, mechanism validation can be incomplete. QA generation can also introduce bias if questions repeatedly target easy concepts or leak the gold answer to the answerer. These risks are monitored through held-out QA, grounding checks, generator-answerer separation and probe-diversity statistics. 25 Supplementary Table S13 Recovery protocol. Each method is adapted under the same post-modification frame budget within a game and then evaluated with the same raw-frame cap used for score reporting. 

Game Seeds Post-mod budget Evaluation cap 

kangaroo 5 20,000 frames/seed 20,000 frames/seed 

seaquest 5 20,000 frames/seed 20,000 frames/seed 

kingkong 5 20,000 frames/seed 20,000 frames/seed 

Supplementary Table S14 Recovery details. Score ratios are normalized by original-environment performance. Shaded cells mark the recovered score ratio and recovery gain after adaptation. 

Score ratio Game Shift Method Orig. Init. Recov. Gain 

kangaroo faster monkeys PPO 1.00 0.54 0.66 +0.12 

kangaroo faster monkeys ESBM 1.00 0.71 0.94 +0.23 

seaquest faster oxygen decay PPO 1.00 0.46 0.60 +0.14 

seaquest faster oxygen decay ESBM 1.00 0.65 0.90 +0.25 

kingkong faster bombs PPO 1.00 0.38 0.53 +0.15 

kingkong faster bombs ESBM 1.00 0.61 0.86 +0.25 

26