Title: ARMOR-MAD: Adaptive Routing for Heterogeneous Multi-Agent Debate in Large Language Model Reasoning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.13197v1

Published Time: Fri, 12 Jun 2026 00:49:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# ARMOR-MAD: Adaptive Routing for Heterogeneous Multi-Agent Debate in Large Language Model Reasoning 

Fuqiang Niu 1, Bowen Zhang 2

> 1

School of Cyber Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China 

> 2

School of Artificial Intelligence, Shenzhen Technology University, Shenzhen, China 

Abstract 

Multi-agent debate (MAD) can improve large language model reasoning, but fixed debate pipelines often waste computation and can am-plify correlated errors among similar agents. We propose ARMOR-MAD, a training-free heterogeneous MAD framework that treats de-bate as conditional computation. ARMOR-MAD combines three components: Pre-debate Agreement Routing (PAR) decides whether in-dependently generated Round-0 answers re-quire debate; Early Agreement Stopping Eval-uator (EASE) stops debate after convergence; and Semantic Outlier Detection (SOD) down-weights abnormal final answers during aggrega-tion. Across MATH Level 5, GSM8K, MMLU, and MMLU-Pro, ARMOR-MAD consistently improves over fixed-round heterogeneous de-bate with the same model pool, reaching 65.5%, 96.5%, 90.0%, and 81.5% accuracy, respec-tively. The results suggest that genuine model heterogeneity and agreement-based control are both important for making MAD more accurate and efficient. 

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have made substan-tial progress on mathematical reasoning, scientific question answering, and complex decision-making tasks. Yet single-model reasoning remains brittle: models often fail to self-correct without external feedback (Huang et al., 2024), chain-of-thought prompting can propagate early mistakes (Wei et al., 2022), and confidence is not always calibrated with correctness (Kadavath et al., 2022). Multi-agent de-bate (MAD) addresses these weaknesses by letting multiple LLM agents generate answers, exchange rationales, critique one another, and revise their predictions (Du et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024). Prior work reports gains in factuality, reasoning, and LLM-based evaluation (Du et al., 2024; Chan et al., 2024), while broader multi-agent LLM frame-works show how conversation-based agent systems can coordinate roles and workflows (Li et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024b). Despite these gains, many MAD systems still inherit two fragile assumptions. First, they assume that multiple agents provide independent evidence even when agents share the same backbone model or differ only through role prompts. In this setting, agents can share knowledge gaps, reasoning biases, and error modes, so debate may reinforce com-mon mistakes instead of correcting them (Zhang et al., 2024). Second, they assume that every in-put benefits from the same fixed debate procedure. Fixed-round debate wastes computation on easy examples where agents already agree, and it can amplify conformity on difficult examples where agents move toward an incorrect consensus. Recent analyses sharpen these concerns. Choi et al. (2026) disentangle multi-agent decision mak-ing into voting and debate, showing that much of the empirical gain commonly attributed to MAD can be explained by voting rather than deliberation itself. Their theoretical analysis models debate as a martingale process over agents’ belief trajectories, suggesting that debate alone does not necessarily improve expected correctness under their assump-tions. Complementarily, Pitre et al. (2025) iden-tify sycophancy as a failure mode in multi-agent LLM interactions, where agents may conform to peer responses instead of critically examining them. These findings suggest that MAD should not be treated as “more agents plus more rounds”, but as a controlled decision process whose behavior depends on agent diversity, input difficulty, and disagreement structure. This view leads to two design principles. First, 

heterogeneity gives independent perspectives : re-ducing correlated errors requires agents from gen-uinely different model families, not only prompt-level role variation. Second, adaptivity decides how to use those perspectives : the system should determine when debate is necessary, when it should 

> arXiv:2606.13197v1 [cs.AI] 11 Jun 2026 Figure 1: Motivating comparison between conventional MAD and ARMOR-MAD. Conventional MAD can rely on agents with shared background knowledge and a fixed workflow, which may preserve correlated errors. ARMOR-MAD uses heterogeneous agents and adaptive control to route, stop, and aggregate reasoning accord-ing to the structure of agent agreement.

stop, and how final answers should be aggregated. Figure 1 summarizes the resulting contrast between fixed homogeneous debate and adaptive heteroge-neous debate, motivating three coupled decisions: 

WHO should participate, WHEN debate should be triggered, and HOW unreliable or abnormal outputs should be handled. This framing also separates agent diversity from debate control, two factors that are often conflated in prior MAD pipelines. We propose ARMOR-MAD , an Adaptive Rout-ing Multi-Agent Reasoning and Debate framework that makes these decisions in a unified pipeline. For 

WHO , ARMOR-MAD uses heterogeneous LLM agents from different model families rather than prompted copies of a single backbone. For WHEN ,it introduces Pre-debate Agreement Routing (PAR), a training-free mechanism that collects independent Round-0 answers and triggers debate only when initial agreement is insufficient. Early Agreement Stopping Evaluator (EASE) then terminates debate once agents converge. For HOW , Semantic Out-lier Detection (SOD) assigns trust weights to fi-nal answers and down-weights semantically abnor-mal outputs. ARMOR-MAD therefore turns MAD from an indiscriminate fixed-round procedure into an adaptive pipeline over agent construction, de-bate invocation, stopping, and aggregation. Our contributions are threefold. (1) We formu-late multi-agent debate as an adaptive decision process governed by agent heterogeneity, debate routing, stopping, and aggregation. (2) We in-troduce ARMOR-MAD, a training-free heteroge-neous MAD framework combining PAR, EASE, and SOD. (3) We provide empirical evidence across four reasoning and knowledge benchmarks that genuine model heterogeneity and adaptive control jointly improve performance and efficiency over fixed-round debate baselines. 

2 Related Work 

Multi-Agent Debate. Multi-agent debate has been introduced as a collective reasoning paradigm for improving the factuality and reasoning ability of large language models. Du et al. use multiple LLM agents to generate answers independently, exchange reasoning over several rounds, and re-vise predictions based on peer feedback (Du et al., 2024). Liang et al. show that divergent agent perspectives can improve reasoning by increasing the diversity of intermediate solution paths (Liang et al., 2024). Wang et al. further analyze when multi-agent discussions improve LLM reasoning, emphasizing that collaboration structure matters rather than assuming discussion is uniformly ben-eficial (Wang et al., 2024a). ChatEval extends debate to LLM-based evaluation, where evalua-tor agents deliberate over generated outputs (Chan et al., 2024). These systems establish the value of interaction, but they typically run debate as a fixed procedure instead of deciding whether each input needs debate. Several works extend multi-agent reasoning be-yond homogeneous debate and task-specific de-liberation. ReConcile studies round-table-style discussion among diverse LLMs and uses con-sensus among agents to improve reasoning per-formance (Chen et al., 2024a). Dynamic LLM-agent networks explore adaptive collaboration structures among agents, showing that agent inter-action patterns can influence final performance (Liu et al., 2024). Agent-oriented frameworks such as CAMEL, AutoGen, and AgentVerse provide gen-eral mechanisms for role-based conversation, tool use, and multi-agent collaboration (Li et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024b). These studies suggest that the organization of agents matters, but they still do not directly address pre-debate routing: whether a given example should enter multi-round debate in the first place. ARMOR-MAD differs from prior MAD systems by treating debate as con-ditional computation rather than a default inference procedure. 

Agent Heterogeneity. The effectiveness of multi-agent reasoning depends on whether agents provide genuinely independent perspectives. Standard ho-mogeneous MAD uses multiple instances of the same backbone model, relying on sampling vari-ation to produce useful disagreement (Du et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024). However, agents from the same model family can share correlated errors, sim-ilar reasoning biases, and overlapping knowledge gaps. Prompt-diversified methods attempt to in-crease diversity by assigning agents different roles, expertise descriptions, or reasoning styles (Zhou and Chen, 2025). Although role-based prompting can create surface-level behavioral differences, all agents still operate within the same underlying pa-rameter space when they share the same backbone model. Another line of work uses multiple model fam-ilies to improve robustness. ReConcile studies it-erative consensus formation among diverse LLMs (Chen et al., 2024a). Mixture-of-agents combines outputs from multiple proposer models through an aggregator model and improves response quality through cross-model collaboration (Wang et al., 2025). However, mixture-of-agents primarily per-forms single-pass aggregation rather than adaptive multi-round debate (Wang et al., 2025). ARMOR-MAD uses genuine model heterogeneity as the starting point, then decides whether interaction is needed from the agents’ initial agreement. This separates two questions that prior work often en-tangles: how to construct diverse agents, and when their interaction should be invoked. 

Adaptive Control. Adaptive control is important for multi-agent LLM systems because debate can be costly and unreliable when applied indiscrimi-nately. Self-consistency improves chain-of-thought reasoning by sampling multiple reasoning paths from a single model and selecting the most consis-tent answer (Wang et al., 2023). Structured deci-sion fusion has also been explored in social-media stance detection, where logic-augmented frame-works combine multiple decision signals rather than relying on a single classifier prediction (Zhang et al., 2025). Choi et al. disentangle multi-agent de-cision making into majority voting and inter-agent debate, showing that much of the empirical gain commonly attributed to MAD can be explained by voting rather than deliberation itself (Choi et al., 2026). Their theoretical analysis models debate as a martingale process over agents’ belief trajecto-ries, suggesting that debate alone does not neces-sarily improve expected correctness under their as-sumptions (Choi et al., 2026). These findings moti-vate adaptive mechanisms that decide when debate should be triggered instead of applying multi-round deliberation to every input. Consensus formation in multi-agent debate also faces robustness challenges. Pitre et al. iden-tify sycophancy as a failure mode in multi-agent LLM interactions, where agents may reinforce peer responses rather than critically evaluate them (Pitre et al., 2025). Routing-based methods ad-dress efficiency from a different perspective. Mas-Router formulates multi-agent system routing as a learned decision problem and selects collabo-ration modes, agent roles, and LLM backbones through a cascaded controller (Yue et al., 2025). While these methods improve either consensus behavior or multi-agent routing, they typically rely on interaction-time prompting strategies or learned controllers. ARMOR-MAD instead uses a training-free control pipeline: PAR routes exam-ples based on Round-0 agreement, EASE stops debate once agents converge, and SOD performs semantic outlier-aware aggregation. 

3 Method 

Problem Formulation. Given an input question 

q, a multi-agent reasoning system consists of K

LLM agents A = {a1, . . . , a K }. Each agent pro-duces an answer yi and, optionally, a rationale ri.The system returns a final answer ˆy while control-ling inference cost C(q), measured by generated tokens. Conventional MAD systems apply a fixed debate procedure to every input. In contrast, we formulate multi-agent debate as an adaptive decision process. The system must decide which agents should par-ticipate, whether debate should be triggered, when debate should stop, and how the final answer should be aggregated. 

Overview of ARMOR-MAD. Figure 2 gives an overview of ARMOR-MAD. The framework is or-ganized around three decisions. First, for WHO ,heterogeneous agents from different model families answer the input question independently in Round 0, producing diverse candidate answers. Second, for WHEN , PAR measures initial agreement and routes high-agreement examples directly forward, while low-agreement examples enter multi-round debate. EASE monitors the debate trajectory and stops once the agents become stable. Third, for 

HOW , SOD detects semantically abnormal candi-dates and aggregates the consistent answers to pro-duce the final prediction. This design turns MAD from an indiscriminate fixed-round procedure into an adaptive pipeline. Heterogeneous agents address the agent composi-tion problem, PAR and EASE address debate con-trol, and SOD addresses robust aggregation. Al-gorithm 1 provides the corresponding procedural summary. 

Heterogeneous Agent Construction. To reduce correlated errors, ARMOR-MAD uses LLMs from different model families as agents. In our imple-mentation, the agent set consists of gpt-4o-mini, deepseek-v3, and qwen-plus. This differs from ho-mogeneous MAD, where all agents are sampled from the same backbone model, and from prompt-diversified MAD, where agents share model param-eters but receive different role or reasoning-style prompts. The motivation is that useful debate requires agents to provide sufficiently independent perspec-tives. Agents from the same model family may share similar factual blind spots and reasoning bi-ases, causing debate to reinforce common errors. In contrast, heterogeneous agents are more likely to exhibit complementary strengths and different error profiles. 

Pre-debate Agreement Routing. PAR decides whether debate should be triggered before running any multi-round interaction. Given an input ques-tion q, each agent ai independently produces a Round-0 answer y(0)  

> i

. The system obtains the ini-tial answer set: 

Y (0) = {y(0) 1 , y (0) 2 , . . . , y (0)  

> K

}.

PAR then computes an agreement score over the Round-0 answers after task-specific answer normal-ization. For multiple-choice tasks, normalization maps each prediction to an option label. For mathe-matical reasoning tasks, normalization extracts the final numeric or symbolic answer before compar-ison. The agreement score is defined as the vote share of the most frequent normalized answer: 

Agree( Y (0) ) = 1

K max  

> c

|{ i : y(0)  

> i

= c}| .

If Agree( Y (0) ) ≥ τ , ARMOR-MAD skips de-bate and directly aggregates the Round-0 answers. Otherwise, the system triggers multi-round debate. In our experiments, we use τ = 0 .67 , which corre-sponds to at least two out of three agents agreeing. 

Early Agreement Stopping. For examples routed to debate, ARMOR-MAD conducts iterative interaction among agents. At each debate round t,every agent observes the previous-round answers and rationales from other agents, and then updates its own answer: 

y(t) 

> i

= ai(q, Y (t−1) ).

After each round, EASE computes the agree-ment score among current answers. If the agree-ment score reaches a stopping threshold ϕ, the de-bate terminates early: 

Agree( Y (t)) ≥ ϕ. 

Otherwise, the debate continues until reaching the maximum number of rounds Tmax . In the main experiments, ϕ = 1 .0, so EASE stops debate only when all three agents converge to the same normal-ized answer. 

Semantic Outlier Detection. After either the Round-0 routing stage or the debate stage, ARMOR-MAD aggregates the available agent an-swers using Semantic Outlier Detection. Let Y =

{y1, . . . , y K } denote the final answer set to be ag-gregated. Before aggregation, answers are normal-ized to task-level labels, such as option letters for multiple-choice tasks or extracted final expressions for mathematical tasks. To estimate whether an answer is semantically isolated from the rest of the group, each agent response is mapped to a TF-IDF representation ei computed over the final response text. We then compute a trust score for each answer based on its average semantic similarity to other answers: 

wi = 1

K − 1

X 

> j̸=i

cos( ei, e j ).

An answer is considered semantically abnormal if its dissimilarity exceeds a threshold: 

1 − wi > λ out .

SOD then forms a reliability-adjusted score ˜wi

by setting the weight of abnormal answers to zero and keeping the original trust score for the remain-ing answers. The final prediction is selected from the highest-scoring normalized answer cluster: 

ˆy = arg max 

> c

X

> i:yi=c

˜wi.Figure 2: Framework of ARMOR-MAD. Heterogeneous agents first produce independent Round-0 answers from different model families and knowledge sources. PAR decides whether the candidates already agree sufficiently; high-agreement cases skip debate, while low-agreement cases enter debate and are stopped by EASE after convergence. The resulting accepted candidates are then passed to SOD, which detects semantic outliers and aggregates consistent answers into the final prediction. 

If all answers are marked abnormal, ARMOR-MAD falls back to majority voting over the normal-ized answers. This fallback prevents the aggrega-tion stage from discarding all available evidence in high-disagreement cases. 

Computational Cost. ARMOR-MAD always begins with K independent Round-0 model calls, one for each heterogeneous agent. The adaptive components control only the additional debate cost. Let I(q) indicate whether PAR routes input q to debate, and let T (q) denote the number of debate rounds actually executed before EASE stops the process. The total number of agent calls is 

K + I(q) · K · T (q).

By contrast, fixed-round MAD uses K(1 + Tmax )

calls for every input. ARMOR-MAD therefore matches fixed-round debate on low-agreement ex-amples that require the full number of rounds, but reduces computation whenever agents agree in Round 0 or converge before Tmax . This cost model clarifies why adaptivity is useful: high-agreement examples can often be solved through heteroge-neous voting and robust aggregation, while low-agreement examples still receive deliberation. 

4 Experimental Setup 

4.1 Datasets 

We evaluate ARMOR-MAD on four benchmarks covering mathematical reasoning and knowledge-intensive question answering. MATH Level 5 

(Hendrycks et al., 2021) contains high-difficulty competition-style mathematical problems requiring multi-step symbolic reasoning. GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) consists of grade-school mathemati-cal word problems and is used to evaluate arith-metic and textual reasoning. MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020) is a standard multiple-choice bench-mark covering a broad range of academic subjects. 

MMLU-Pro (Wang et al., 2024b) is a more chal-lenging multiple-choice benchmark with more an-swer options and higher domain complexity. All methods are evaluated on exactly the same exam-ples to ensure paired comparison. Detailed dataset statistics and sampling procedures are provided in Appendix A. 

4.2 Baselines 

We compare ARMOR-MAD with representative single-model, voting-based, debate-based, and aggregation-based baselines. Single-CoT (Wei et al., 2022) uses chain-of-thought prompting as a single-agent reasoning baseline. Self-Consistency 

(Wang et al., 2023) samples multiple reasoning paths and selects the final answer by majority vote. 

Homo-MAD (Du et al., 2024) follows the stan-dard multi-agent debate setting, where multiple agents debate over several rounds before final ag-gregation. D-MAD (Zhou and Chen, 2025) is a prompt-diversified MAD baseline inspired by role-diverse heterogeneous debate, where agents are as-signed different reasoning styles while sharing the same model family. MoA (Wang et al., 2025) fol-Algorithm 1 ARMOR-MAD 

Require: Question q, agents A = {a1, . . . , a K },routing threshold τ , stopping threshold ϕ, max-imum rounds Tmax  

> 1:

Obtain independent Round-0 answers Y (0) =

{ai(q)}Ki=1  

> 2:

Compute initial agreement s(0) =Agree( Y (0) ) 

> 3:

if s(0) ≥ τ then  

> 4: 5:

return SOD( Y (0) ) 

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

for t = 1 to Tmax do  

> 8:

Each agent updates its answer after observ-ing Y (t−1)  

> 9:

Obtain updated answers Y (t) 

> 10:

Compute agreement s(t) = Agree( Y (t)) 

> 11:

if s(t) ≥ ϕ then  

> 12:

break  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

end for  

> 15: 16:

return SOD( Y (t))

lows the mixture-of-agents paradigm, where mul-tiple proposer outputs are synthesized by an ag-gregator in a single pass. Hetero-MAD (Chen et al., 2024a) is a heterogeneous debate baseline inspired by ReConcile-style multi-model discus-sion and consensus formation. Hetero-Vote-only 

(Choi et al., 2026) is a voting-only diagnostic base-line motivated by recent debate-or-vote analyses, where heterogeneous agents provide initial answers without iterative debate. Detailed model choices, prompting strategies, debate rounds, and aggre-gation rules for all baselines are provided in Ap-pendix B. 

4.3 Evaluation Metrics 

Following the standard accuracy-based evaluation protocols of these benchmarks (Hendrycks et al., 2021; Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2024b), we report accuracy as the pri-mary metric for all datasets. For multiple-choice benchmarks, including MMLU and MMLU-Pro, a prediction is considered correct if the extracted option matches the gold option. For mathematical reasoning benchmarks, including MATH Level 5 and GSM8K, we extract the final answer from the model output and compare it with the gold answer using the same normalization rules for all methods.                                     

> Method MATH L5 GSM8K MMLU MMLU-Pro
> Single-CoT 43.0 92.0 82.0 61.5 Self-Consistency 50.0 94.0 84.0 66.0 Homo-MAD 53.5 64.5 66.5 54.0 D-MAD 59.0 95.5 66.5 53.5 Hetero-Vote-only 50.5 93.0 87.5 71.5 Hetero-MAD 63.5 89.0 84.5 76.0 MoA 60.5 94.5 89.0 79.0
> ARMOR-MAD 65.5 96.5 90.0 81.5

Table 1: Main accuracy results across four benchmarks. 

4.4 Implementation Details 

We use gpt-4o-mini for all single-model and homogeneous-agent baselines. For heteroge-neous multi-agent methods, including Hetero-MAD, Hetero-Vote-only, and ARMOR-MAD, we use a fixed model pool consisting of gpt-4o-mini ,

deepseek-v3 , and qwen-plus . Each model call is limited to 1,024 generated tokens. For ARMOR-MAD, PAR uses an agreement threshold of τ =0.67 , corresponding to at least two out of three agents agreeing in Round 0. For routed examples, we use at most three debate rounds, and EASE stops debate once all three normalized answers converge. SOD uses λout = 0 .7 as the seman-tic outlier threshold in the main experiments. De-tailed prompts, baseline configurations, decoding settings, and answer extraction rules are provided in Appendix C. 

5 Experimental Results 

5.1 Main Results 

Table 1 reports the main results across four bench-marks. ARMOR-MAD obtains the highest accu-racy on all four benchmarks under the main ex-perimental setting. On mathematical reasoning tasks, ARMOR-MAD reaches 65.5% on MATH Level 5 and 96.5% on GSM8K. On knowledge-intensive multiple-choice tasks, ARMOR-MAD reaches 90.0% on MMLU and 81.5% on MMLU-Pro. Compared with Hetero-MAD, which uses the same heterogeneous model pool but performs fixed-round debate, ARMOR-MAD improves per-formance on all four datasets. Because Hetero-MAD uses the same model pool, this comparison isolates the contribution of adaptive routing, early stopping, and semantic aggregation beyond model heterogeneity alone. The results show three patterns. First, homo-geneous debate is unstable: Homo-MAD sub-stantially underperforms Single-CoT on GSM8K, MMLU, and MMLU-Pro, suggesting that re-Variant / Dataset Variant ARMOR                       

> Fixed heterogeneous debate
> MATH L5 63.5 65.5
> GSM8K 89.0 96.5
> MMLU 84.5 90.0
> MMLU-Pro 76.0 81.5
> Heterogeneous vote only
> MATH L5 50.5 65.5
> GSM8K 93.0 96.5
> MMLU 87.5 90.0
> MMLU-Pro 71.5 81.5
> Routing / aggregation variants
> Conf. route 51.5 65.5
> Maj. vote 89.0 90.0
> No struct. 89.5 96.5
> Table 2: Ablation results. Conf. route is evaluated on MATH L5, Maj. vote on MMLU, and No struct. on GSM8K. All numbers are accuracies.

peated interaction among agents from the same model family can amplify shared errors. Second, prompt diversity is task-dependent. D-MAD per-forms strongly on GSM8K, where reasoning-style prompts can help arithmetic word-problem solv-ing, but it closely matches Homo-MAD on MMLU and MMLU-Pro. This pattern suggests that prompt diversity alone does not reliably remove shared knowledge blind spots in knowledge-intensive set-tings. Third, ARMOR-MAD improves over Hetero-MAD on every dataset, showing the effect of adap-tive control when the model pool is fixed. We therefore interpret ARMOR-MAD as improving the accuracy-efficiency trade-off of heterogeneous debate rather than merely benefiting from access to stronger or more diverse base models. 

5.2 Ablation Studies 

We ablate key design choices in ARMOR-MAD. Table 2 summarizes two groups of comparisons. Hetero-MAD removes the adaptive components and runs fixed-round heterogeneous debate. Hetero-Vote-only removes debate and aggregates only the initial heterogeneous answers. The remaining di-agnostic variants isolate specific implementation choices: LLM-confidence routing replaces PAR with model-reported confidence as the routing sig-nal, majority voting replaces SOD with simple vot-ing, and the unstructured-output variant removes structured final-answer formatting on GSM8K. The comparison with Hetero-MAD measures the effect of ARMOR-MAD’s adaptive compo-nents under the same heterogeneous model pool. Full ARMOR-MAD improves over fixed-round het-erogeneous debate on all four datasets, with the largest gains on GSM8K and MMLU. The compar-ison with Hetero-Vote-only shows that ARMOR-MAD is not merely a heterogeneous voting sys-tem: selective debate and robust aggregation im-prove over Round-0 voting on all four benchmarks. The diagnostic variants isolate individual design choices. Replacing PAR with LLM-confidence routing causes a large drop on MATH Level 5, sug-gesting that subjective model confidence is weaker than agreement among heterogeneous agents as a routing signal. Replacing SOD with majority vot-ing slightly reduces MMLU accuracy, indicating that semantic aggregation provides a modest but measurable gain over simple voting. The GSM8K unstructured-output variant further shows that reli-able final-answer formatting matters for PAR, be-cause inconsistent numeric formats can hide agree-ment among agents. 

5.3 Agent Heterogeneity and Echo Chambers 

The results in Table 1 provide evidence for two types of echo-chamber behavior. On GSM8K, D-MAD achieves 95.5%, showing that prompt diver-sity can induce useful alternative reasoning strate-gies on arithmetic word problems. However, on MMLU and MMLU-Pro, D-MAD closely matches Homo-MAD and remains far below Hetero-MAD and ARMOR-MAD. This suggests that knowledge-intensive tasks can suffer from a knowledge-parametric echo chamber: agents that share the same backbone model may also share similar fac-tual blind spots. In such cases, role prompts or reasoning-style prompts may not fully substitute for genuine model heterogeneity. 

5.4 Interaction Between Heterogeneity and Adaptivity 

The main results and ablations indicate that het-erogeneity and adaptivity play different roles. Het-erogeneity changes the evidence available to the system: agents from different model families are more likely to disagree for meaningful reasons, ex-posing uncertainty that homogeneous agents may hide. Adaptivity changes how the system uses that evidence: PAR treats high agreement as a signal to avoid unnecessary debate, EASE prevents ad-ditional rounds after convergence, and SOD re-duces the influence of isolated final answers. The comparison between Hetero-MAD and ARMOR-MAD is therefore central because both methods use the same model pool; the gains of ARMOR-Metric MATH L5 GSM8K MMLU MMLU-Pro                 

> Debate Trigger Rate 83.0 10.5 25.0 59.5 Skip Rate 17.0 89.5 75.0 40.5 Skipped Accuracy 91.2 99.4 95.3 96.3 Debated Accuracy 60.2 71.4 74.0 71.4
> Table 3: PAR routing behavior. Rates and accuracies are reported in percentages.

MAD come from deciding when and how to use heterogeneous opinions, rather than simply adding stronger agents. This also explains why voting-only and fixed-debate baselines are incomplete controls. Hetero-Vote-only benefits from model diversity but can-not revise answers when agents initially disagree. Fixed Hetero-MAD allows interaction but applies it uniformly, including cases where debate is unnec-essary or where additional rounds may encourage conformity. ARMOR-MAD occupies the middle ground: it preserves the efficiency of voting for high-agreement inputs while retaining debate for low-agreement cases. This supports our central view that MAD should be formulated as condi-tional computation over diverse agents, not as a fixed number of deliberation rounds. 

5.5 PAR Routing Behavior 

Table 3 reports how PAR partitions examples into skipped and debated subsets. Skipped examples are those for which heterogeneous agents already agree in Round 0 and therefore bypass debate. Across datasets, skipped examples have high accuracy, ranging from 91.2% on MATH Level 5 to 99.4% on GSM8K. This supports the main assumption behind PAR: high initial agreement among hetero-geneous agents is a useful signal that debate is often unnecessary. The routing behavior varies substantially across datasets. GSM8K has the highest skip rate, indi-cating that most examples are already solved con-sistently in Round 0. MATH Level 5 has the high-est debate-trigger rate, reflecting the difficulty of competition-style mathematical reasoning. MMLU and MMLU-Pro fall between these two extremes, showing that PAR adapts to both task difficulty and answer-space structure. 

5.6 Efficiency Observations 

PAR and EASE reduce computation by avoiding unnecessary debate. On GSM8K, ARMOR-MAD skips most examples and reduces average token usage to 2,629 tokens per example, showing the largest efficiency benefit in a high-agreement set-ting. On MATH Level 5, most examples are routed to debate, so the efficiency gain is smaller; neverthe-less, ARMOR-MAD reduces average token usage from 25,725 to 23,070 compared with fixed-round Hetero-MAD. On MMLU-Pro, ARMOR-MAD uses 16,467 tokens on average, compared with ap-proximately 20,000 tokens for Hetero-MAD. These results show that the computational benefit is input-dependent. PAR is most useful when many exam-ples can be safely solved from Round-0 agreement, while difficult low-agreement examples still receive debate. 

5.7 Discussion 

Taken together, the results suggest that the main benefit of ARMOR-MAD is not simply adding more agents, but controlling when heterogeneous opinions should interact. High agreement among different model families is a strong signal that addi-tional rounds are often redundant, as shown by the high skipped accuracy on GSM8K, MMLU, and MMLU-Pro. Low agreement, by contrast, indicates examples where the system should spend more computation on deliberation and robust aggrega-tion. This pattern also clarifies the role of Figure 1: the failure mode of fixed MAD is not that debate is always harmful, but that a uniform workflow can-not distinguish easy high-agreement inputs from difficult low-agreement inputs. ARMOR-MAD ad-dresses this mismatch by combining heterogeneous evidence with lightweight agreement-based control. In this sense, agreement is used not as a final an-swer by itself, but as a control signal for allocating deliberation where it is most likely to help. 

6 Conclusion 

We presented ARMOR-MAD, an adaptive het-erogeneous multi-agent reasoning framework that treats debate as conditional computation rather than a fixed procedure. ARMOR-MAD combines het-erogeneous agents with PAR for pre-debate routing, EASE for early stopping, and SOD for semantic outlier-aware aggregation. Across MATH Level 5, GSM8K, MMLU, and MMLU-Pro, ARMOR-MAD improves over fixed-round heterogeneous debate with the same model pool and achieves the best observed accuracy among evaluated methods. The ablations further suggest that prompt-level di-versity is not a reliable substitute for genuine model heterogeneity, and that agreement-based routing can avoid unnecessary debate while maintaining strong accuracy. This perspective makes adaptivity a first-class design choice for future MAD systems. 

Limitations 

This work has several limitations. First, our main experiments use a fixed pool of three LLM agents, 

gpt-4o-mini , deepseek-v3 , and qwen-plus . Al-though this pool is sufficient to study heterogeneity and adaptive debate, the conclusions may vary with stronger or more specialized models, larger agent sets, or different model families. Second, the rout-ing and stopping rules rely on answer agreement, which is effective for short-answer and multiple-choice tasks but may be less reliable for open-ended generation, dialogue, or tasks with many semanti-cally equivalent outputs. Third, SOD assumes that semantically isolated answers are more likely to be unreliable. This assumption can fail in “lone ex-pert” cases, where a minority agent has the correct answer because it possesses domain knowledge that other agents lack. Fourth, our experiments are conducted on sampled subsets of four bench-marks rather than full benchmark suites, so small accuracy differences should be interpreted with sta-tistical caution. Finally, ARMOR-MAD reduces unnecessary debate in high-agreement cases, but it still requires multiple model calls in Round 0; de-ployment in cost-sensitive settings should therefore consider both accuracy gains and API cost. 

Ethical Considerations 

ARMOR-MAD is a general reasoning framework built on top of existing LLMs, and therefore inher-its the risks of its underlying models. Heteroge-neous agents may reduce some correlated errors, but they do not guarantee factual correctness, fair-ness, or safety. In high-stakes domains such as medicine, law, finance, or education, outputs from ARMOR-MAD should be treated as decision sup-port rather than authoritative judgments, and hu-man oversight remains necessary. The use of mul-tiple commercial or closed-source models can also increase inference cost, energy consumption, and dependence on external providers. Because the framework routes and aggregates model outputs automatically, practitioners should monitor failure cases where agents converge on an incorrect answer or where the aggregation mechanism suppresses a correct minority response. We release the method as a research contribution and encourage future work on transparent routing criteria, calibrated un-certainty estimates, and stronger safeguards for sen-sitive applications. 

References                            

> Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and Zhiyuan Liu. 2024. Chateval: Towards better LLM-based eval-uators through multi-agent debate. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Justin Chen, Swarnadeep Saha, and Mohit Bansal. 2024a. Reconcile: Round-table conference improves reasoning via consensus among diverse llms. In Pro-ceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 7066–7085. Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chen Qian, Chi-Min Chan, Yujia Qin, Yaxi Lu, Ruobing Xie, and 1 others. 2024b. Agent-verse: Facilitating multi-agent collaboration and ex-ploring emergent behaviors. In The Twelfth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Hyeong Kyu Choi, Jerry Zhu, and Sharon Li. 2026. Debate or vote: Which yields better decisions in multi-agent large language models? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:101732– 101764. Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, and 1 others. 2021. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 .Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenen-baum, and Igor Mordatch. 2024. Improving factual-ity and reasoning in language models through multia-gent debate. In Forty-first international conference on machine learning .Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2020. Measuring massive multitask language under-standing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300 .Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the MATH dataset. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2) .Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Yu, Xinying Song, and Denny Zhou. 2024. Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. In
> International conference on learning representations ,volume 2024, pages 32808–32824.

Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, and 1 others. 2022. Language mod-els (mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221 .Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. 2023. CAMEL: Communicative agents for “mind” explo-ration of large language model society. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:51991– 52008. Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing Wang, Yan Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang, Shuming Shi, and Zhaopeng Tu. 2024. Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through multi-agent debate. In Proceedings of the 2024 conference on empiri-cal methods in natural language processing , pages 17889–17904. Zijun Liu, Yanzhe Zhang, Peng Li, Yang Liu, and Diyi Yang. 2024. Dynamic LLM-agent network: An LLM-agent collaboration framework with agent team optimization. Priya Pitre, Naren Ramakrishnan, and Xuan Wang. 2025. Consensagent: Towards efficient and effective con-sensus in multi-agent llm interactions through syco-phancy mitigation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 22112– 22133. Junlin Wang, Jue Wang, Ben Athiwaratkun, Ce Zhang, and James Y Zou. 2025. Mixture-of-agents enhances large language model capabilities. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 33944–33963. Qineng Wang, Zihao Wang, Ying Su, Hanghang Tong, and Yangqiu Song. 2024a. Rethinking the bounds of LLM reasoning: Are multi-agent discussions the key? In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6106–6131. Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In 

The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Yubo Wang, Xueguang Ma, Ge Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, Abhranil Chandra, Shiguang Guo, Weiming Ren, Aaran Arulraj, Xuan He, Ziyan Jiang, and 1 others. 2024b. Mmlu-pro: A more robust and challenging multi-task language understanding benchmark. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:95266–95290. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and 1 others. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elic-its reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824– 24837. Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, and 1 others. 2024. Auto-Gen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversation. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Large Language Model Agents .Yanwei Yue, Guibin Zhang, Boyang Liu, Guancheng Wan, Kun Wang, Dawei Cheng, and Yiyan Qi. 2025. MasRouter: Learning to route LLMs for multi-agent systems. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 15549–15572. Bowen Zhang, Daijun Ding, Zhichao Huang, Ang Li, Yangyang Li, Baoquan Zhang, and Hu Huang. 2024. Knowledge-augmented interpretable network for zero-shot stance detection on social media. IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems .Bowen Zhang, Jun Ma, Xianghua Fu, and Genan Dai. 2025. Logic augmented multi-decision fusion frame-work for stance detection on social media. Informa-tion Fusion , 122:103214. Yan Zhou and Yanguang Chen. 2025. Adaptive hetero-geneous multi-agent debate for enhanced educational and factual reasoning in large language models. Jour-nal of King Saud University Computer and Informa-tion Sciences , 37(10):330. 

A Dataset Details 

We evaluate all methods on four benchmarks: MATH Level 5, GSM8K, MMLU, and MMLU-Pro. For the main experiments, we sample n = 200 

examples from each dataset using the same random seed, seed =123. All methods are evaluated on ex-actly the same sampled examples to ensure paired comparisons across systems. All datasets are pub-licly available research benchmarks, and we use them only for standard evaluation following their original usage terms. The evaluated commercial LLMs are accessed through their official APIs un-der the corresponding providers’ terms of service. 

MATH Level 5. MATH Level 5 is the most diffi-cult subset of the MATH benchmark (Hendrycks et al., 2021). It contains competition-style mathe-matical problems that require multi-step symbolic reasoning across topics such as algebra, geometry, number theory, counting and probability, prealge-bra, and precalculus. We use Level 5 problems because they provide a challenging setting where initial disagreement among agents is common and debate may be beneficial. GSM8K. GSM8K is a grade-school mathemati-cal word problem benchmark (Cobbe et al., 2021). Problems typically require multi-step arithmetic and textual reasoning, and the final answer is usu-ally a single integer or short numeric expression. This dataset is used to evaluate whether ARMOR-MAD can avoid unnecessary debate on relatively high-agreement reasoning examples. 

MMLU. MMLU is a broad multiple-choice benchmark covering 57 academic subjects across STEM, humanities, social sciences, and other do-mains (Hendrycks et al., 2020). Each question has four answer options. We use MMLU to evaluate knowledge-intensive reasoning and the effect of model heterogeneity on standard multiple-choice tasks. 

MMLU-Pro. MMLU-Pro is a more challenging extension of MMLU that increases the number of answer options and emphasizes more difficult reasoning-oriented questions (Wang et al., 2024b). Compared with standard MMLU, it reduces the chance-level baseline and provides a more discrim-inative setting for evaluating robust aggregation and adaptive debate. 

B Baseline Details 

We provide implementation details for all baselines used in the main experiments. All methods are evaluated on the same sampled examples, and all outputs are processed using the same answer ex-traction and evaluation scripts. 

Single-CoT. Single-CoT uses a single LLM with chain-of-thought prompting. The model is prompted to produce intermediate reasoning and then output a final answer. 

Self-Consistency. Self-Consistency samples k =5 independent reasoning paths from the same model and aggregates the extracted final answers by majority vote. 

Homo-MAD. Homo-MAD uses multiple agents instantiated from the same backbone model. Agents first generate independent initial answers and then participate in a fixed number of debate rounds. The final answers are aggregated after the last round. 

D-MAD. D-MAD is a prompt-diversified MAD baseline. It uses agents with different reasoning-style prompts or role prompts while keeping the same underlying model family. This baseline is used to test whether prompt-level diversity can sub-stitute for genuine model heterogeneity. 

MoA. MoA uses multiple proposer outputs and a separate aggregation step to synthesize the final answer. Unlike MAD-style methods, MoA does not perform iterative inter-agent debate. 

Hetero-MAD. Hetero-MAD uses agents from different model families and runs fixed-round de-bate. This baseline serves as the heterogeneous debate counterpart to ARMOR-MAD. 

Hetero-Vote-only. Hetero-Vote-only collects only the initial Round-0 answers from hetero-geneous agents and aggregates them without any debate. This diagnostic baseline is used to distinguish gains from heterogeneous voting from gains introduced by iterative debate. 

C Implementation Details 

For single-model and homogeneous-agent base-lines, we use gpt-4o-mini . For heterogeneous methods, we use gpt-4o-mini , deepseek-v3 ,and qwen-plus . This heterogeneous model pool is used for Hetero-MAD, Hetero-Vote-only, and ARMOR-MAD. Each model call is limited to 1,024 generated tokens. All MAD-style methods use a maximum of three debate rounds. For ARMOR-MAD, PAR uses 

τ = 0 .67 as the routing threshold. This corre-sponds to two-out-of-three agreement in Round 0. Examples below this threshold are routed to debate, while high-agreement examples skip debate. For routed examples, EASE checks agreement after each debate round and stops debate once all three normalized answers converge. SOD is applied as the final aggregation step with λout = 0 .7 in the main experiments. For mathematical datasets, models are instructed to provide an explicit final answer to reduce ex-traction ambiguity. For multiple-choice datasets, models are instructed to output one option from the given choices. All methods use the same answer extraction and normalization scripts. Dataset sam-pling details and baseline-specific configurations are provided in Appendix A and Appendix B.