Title: CoAgent: Concurrency Control for Multi-Agent Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.15376v1

Published Time: Tue, 16 Jun 2026 01:11:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# CoAgent: Concurrency Control for Multi-Agent Systems 

## Hongtao Lyu 

Shanghai Jiao Tong University China 

hongtaolyu@sjtu.edu.cn 

## Dingyan Zhang 

Shanghai Jiao Tong University China 

healthcliff-ding@sjtu.edu.cn 

## Mingyu Wu 

Shanghai Jiao Tong University China 

mingyuwu@sjtu.edu.cn 

## Xingda Wei 

Shanghai Jiao Tong University China 

wxdwfc@sjtu.edu.cn 

## Haibo Chen 

Shanghai Jiao Tong University China 

haibochen@sjtu.edu.cn 

## Abstract 

Multi-agent LLM systems—coding agents, devops agents, document agents—now routinely run several agents in parallel against the same git tree, Kubernetes cluster, or document. As soon as two of them mutate shared state, they enter the regime classical concurrency control has studied for decades, but classical mechanisms fit LLM agents poorly. A single agent transaction spans minutes of inference, read sets are broad and opaque rather than statically inferable, and the live state agents act on admits neither fork nor buffer, so writes take effect the moment they execute. Locks block long inference intervals; OCC abort-and-retry discards minutes of work on every conflict. This paper builds concurrency control on a capability classical transactions lack: the LLM inside each agent can judge whether a conflicting write actually invali-dates its plan, and can repair exactly the operations that depended on it. Control therefore turns advisory: the runtime informs, the agent repairs. Our protocol, MTPO (Monotonic Trajectory Pre-Order), fixes a serialization order at launch, serves each read the order-filtered value, and applies writes speculatively in place; a one-way notification asks an affected reader to re-judge and patch its plan, while the framework mechanically undoes and reorders misplaced writes through the saga-style inverse each tool registers in advance. At quiescence the run is serializable in the pre-decided order. We realize MTPO as CoAgent, toolcall middleware whose privileged ToolSmith grows footprint-declared, undoable tools online. On ten contended workloads, CoAgent stays within 5% of serial correctness at a 1.4 × speedup and near-serial token cost, where 2PL and OCC surrender nearly all concurrency gains; on a bash -only target system, it grows a 25-tool library online and lifts the task pass rate from 45/71 to 63/71 at 0.80 × the time and 0.86 × the cost. 

## 1 Introduction 

LLM-powered agents, which take actions based on LLM outputs, have revolutionized the artificial intelligence landscape, enabling end-to-end goal achievement on tasks like writing and debugging code [2, 3], research automation [24], and deep research [4], just to name a few [52]. A single agent, however, can be inefficient due to sequential generation of LLM outputs and incapable of complex tasks and may hit a structural ceiling due to context limitations [32]. Modern systems therefore decom-pose the task and run multiple sub-agents concurrently, and the multi-agent paradigm has accordingly become a key pillar of modern agentic systems: Claude Code ships parallel sub-agent teams [1–3], OpenAI Codex and Cursor run background agents on parallel tasks [5, 34], and Kimi Agent Swarm coordinates up to a hundred agents on one job [32]. Running multiple sub-agents concurrently revives a clas-sical problem. Each sub-agent action reads or writes shared state—a file on disk, a page on the web, the configuration of a Kubernetes (K8S) cluster. Thus, like traditional concur-rent programs, the interleaving of reads and writes can eas-ily lead to anomalies. Such failures are already documented at scale: a recent audit of over 200 multi-agent traces at-tributes more than a third of all failures to inter-agent mis-alignment, including agents acting on the same resource un-aware of each other [10]. Consider a concrete instance that we measured on a live K8S cluster, where two agents oper-ate concurrently. Agent A handles a remediation task from AIOpsLab [12]: a faulty rollout has left several deployments running a wrong container image, and A must find and re-pair every affected deployment. Agent B prepares a canary release for one service: it reads the service’s current image and creates a canary deployment mirroring that image. In this run, A scans the cluster before the canary exists, so its repair misses the canary; B reads the image before A repairs it, so the canary is built on the bad image. Both agents faith-fully complete their tasks and report success, yet the cluster ends with a canary on the known-bad image, silently wait-ing to take live traffic. Neither agent erred in its own rea-soning; the fault lies in the interleaving of their reads and 

> 1
> arXiv:2606.15376v1 [cs.DC] 13 Jun 2026

writes, and the final cluster state matches no serial execu-tion of the two agents. §2.2 walks through the trace step by step. This paper studies how to provide concurrency control for multi-agent systems. Current systems (§2.3) either run one agent at a time [15, 23, 39, 50], statically partition the agents’ write sets so that no two agents touch the same state [1], or fork the shared state per agent and merge the forks once every agent finishes [5, 13, 41]. None of these is ideal. Running one agent at a time loses the concurrency benefits of multiple agents; static write partitioning requires the write set to be known in advance, which is often impos-sible for agents whose plans emerge during execution; and fork-and-merge offers only weak isolation akin to read com-mitted in databases [6], so it cannot prevent anomalies like the one described above (detailed in §2.2). The ideal property to enforce on a multi-agent system is therefore serializability [6], which guarantees that any con-current execution is equivalent to some serial order of the agents. Unfortunately, the two classical protocols that real-ize it—two-phase locking (2PL) and optimistic concurrency control (OCC)—both fall short in the agent setting, due to two agent-related gaps (§3): The first is a functionality gap . Classical protocols assume the shared state is plain data such as database rows—data that the system can read, buffer, and overwrite at will. Agents, however, also act on logical state whose effects exist only in the external world: a kubectl apply in our K8S example must be executed against the cluster to take effect, and the agent must observe that effect to continue debugging. This breaks OCC’s staging discipline, which requires modifications to remain in a private buffer until commit. 2PL hits the same wall when it resolves a deadlock: the victim’s writes have already taken effect on the external world, and the system has no way to roll them back (§3.4). The second is a performance gap . Classical protocols were designed for transactions that finish quickly. Agents, in contrast, may run for hours, or even days [3]. At this timescale, 2PL forces an agent to hold its locks for the entire task, blocking every other agent that touches overlapping state. OCC instead pays at re-execution time: even setting the functionality gap aside, a single conflict at validation discards the agent’s entire work. To close these gaps, our key insight is that the backbone of an agent—the LLM—has semantic understanding of the task and the state it is operating on, and that understanding supplies the remedies classical CC lacks. First, the LLM can separate real conflicts from semantically irrelevant read–write interference: most overlaps on an agent’s broad read set invalidate no premise its plan relies on (a peer appending a log line to a file the agent scanned changes nothing it depends on), and the agent can dismiss them with no work lost. Second, on a real conflict, the LLM can choose the most efficient repair path in place of OCC’s all-or-nothing restart: it inspects its own read/write history, identifies the few actions premised on the now-stale value, and re-executes only those. For the conflicts such repair cannot dissolve—a write already applied to the external world but now in the wrong order—the framework falls back to saga-style compensation [20]: every write registers an inverse before executing (a kubectl apply is reversed by re-applying the manifest it displaced), so the frame-work mechanically undoes and reorders misplaced writes without consulting the LLM. Based on this insight, we propose CoAgent (CoAgent), an optimistic concurrency-control framework for multi-agent systems. CoAgent builds on optimism to unleash concur-rent execution: agents execute without being blocked by concurrent agents. To detect and fix anomalies during ex-ecution, we propose a notification mechanism that notifies each agent of concurrent actions that may break its isolation. The notified agent judges whether the change invalidates its premises and patches only the affected actions; writes that landed in the wrong order are undone and reapplied by the framework itself, using the inverses those writes registered. CoAgent guarantees serializability as long as agents fol-low the protocol’s mechanical rules and, when notified, cor-rectly judge which of their premises and pending actions the conflicting write affects; §5.1 states both as explicit as-sumptions of our formal model. These tasks are simple for frontier LLMs: even on a budget-friendly model (DeepSeek v4 flash), our evaluation observed a notified agent misjudg-ing a notification’s relevance in only 5% of trials (§7). By keeping execution concurrent and recovery selective, CoA-gent also significantly improves both efficiency and func-tionality on multi-agent workloads compared with existing concurrency control approaches: it passes all ten contended workloads with correctness within 5% of serial execution, at a 1.4 × speedup and near-serial token cost (1.15 ×). Un-der the same contention, 2PL deadlocks 0.81 times per trial and recovers almost no speedup (1.04 ×), while OCC aborts 0.95 times per trial, runs slower than serial (0.93 ×), and pays 1.83 × token cost; uncoordinated execution is fast but passes only 13% of trials. Beyond the contended workloads, on a target system exposing only bash and no tool table, CoA-gent grows a 25-tool library online and lifts the task pass rate from 45/71 to 63/71, at 0.80 × the time and 0.86 × the cost of the bash baseline (§7.4). 

## 2 Background & Motivation 

2.1 Background: LLM-powered Multi-Agent Systems 

The classical literature defines an agent as a software entity that perceives an environment through observations, delib-erates over those observations against some goal, and acts back on the environment [42, 49]. Modern LLM-powered agent systems instantiate this abstraction by using a

> 2

large language model (LLM) as the deliberation engine and explicit tool calls for observations and actions. This long-running, tool-centric architecture has emerged as the dominant implementation pattern for contemporary coding and workflow agents [2, 51, 52]. The execution model of such agents is characterized by three key properties: 

Append-only context. Each agent maintains a private 

context for the current session—system prompts, user in-structions, tool calls, execution results, and model outputs. The context is designed as an append-only structure, where every LLM inference step appends new contents to the exist-ing history. This structural design effectively leverages op-timizations such as prefix KV caching [27, 53], significantly improving LLM inference efficiency. 

Shared external state and tool-call boundary. Be-yond the private context, the system involves external states that can be shared across multiple agents (e.g., files, database tables, Kubernetes objects, collaborative docu-ments, and external API endpoints)—in practice, named resources mutated through a small verb set, the interface REST canonizes [18]. Agents rely on LLM inference to generate tool calls—the sole channel through which an agent observes or mutates these states. We distinguish two kinds of tool call. A read yields an 

immutable perception : once returned, the value is recorded in the agent’s context as a fixed premise. A write mutates the external state in one of two ways. A blind write sets the state to a value independent of what it replaces: overwrit-ing a configuration key, deleting an entry (REST’s PUT and 

DELETE ). A read–modify–write (RMW) produces an effect that composes with the prior state: appending to a collec-tion, creating an entry under a server-assigned id (REST’s 

POST ). Idempotence is the observable criterion that sepa-rates the two [18]: replaying a blind write is harmless; re-playing an RMW write is not—two POST s create two en-tries. 1 The difference is invisible to a single agent; under concurrency it decides whether a misordered write can be repaired after the fact (§5). 

Agent view. The agent’s accumulated perceptions form its view of the external world—the sole basis for any subse-quent reasoning or tool call. Once a read returns, its value is recorded in the context unchanged: an agent that reads state  

> X

and obtains v0 will treat v0 as the value of X on every later inference, even after X has been mutated externally to v1 . The runtime must either trigger a re-read or push a change mes-sage for the view to catch up; without one of those, every action premised on the now-stale v0 may be wrong. Closing this stale-view gap is the central concern of this paper. 

> 1Idempotent RMW writes exist—a merge-style partial update ( PATCH ) re-applies cleanly—and we conservatively treat them as RMW.

2.2 The Multi-Agent Consistency Problem 

To improve system efficiency and throughput, it is common to adopt a multi-agent architecture that leverages multiple agents to process tasks concurrently. However, multi-agent concurrency issues arise whenever multiple agents operate over the same shared state. Figure 1 shows how two agents, operating concurrently on a live Kubernetes cluster, produce a textbook concur-rency anomaly despite neither making an individual reason-ing error; the trace is a measured run of the case study that §7.3 replays under four coordination protocols. Agent A is given a remediation task taken verbatim from AIOpsLab: a rollout has left an unknown subset of deployments on a wrong image, and A must locate every affected deployment and restore its image to the canonical one (three here: geo ,

profile , reservation ). Agent B is independently tasked with preparing a canary release for geo : read geo ’s current image, then create a zero-replica deployment geo-canary 

mirroring that image, to take a small share of live traffic at the next release window. The anomaly arises due to in-terleaved reads. Agent A lists the cluster before the canary exists, so its audit scope is fixed at the three mismatched ser-vices; Agent B reads geo ’s image before A repairs it, so the canary is built on the bad image. Both agents then finish and report success: B has mirrored what it read, and A’s closing check even lists the new canary but judges it outside the in-cident it was asked to fix. Yet the final state is one no serial order produces: run A first and the canary mirrors the re-paired image; run B first and A’s sweep catches the canary as a fourth mismatch; either way the canary ends on the canonical image. The failure is also silent: the zero-replica canary raises no alarm until the release window routes live traffic onto the known-bad image. The trace also exercises both write classes of §2.1: Agent A’s image restorations are blind overwrites, while Agent B’s canary creation is a read– modify–write; the distinction returns in §5. 

2.3 Existing Isolation Mechanisms for Multi-Agent 

Existing agent systems handle these consistency issues through three broad strategies, all with significant draw-backs. 

Sequential execution. The simplest strategy prevents stale views by prohibiting concurrent execution entirely; during agent handoffs, consistency is preserved either by inheriting the fully updated context [50] or by clearing the context to force a fresh state re-read [15, 23, 39]. This is safe but falls back to serial execution: multiple agents serve only to improve task success rates, not to reduce job completion time. 

Write partitioning. A second strategy statically parti-tions the agents’ write sets, ensuring no two agents con-currently modify the same object. In coding scenarios, sys-tems like Claude Code Agent Teams [1] explicitly prompt                                                                   

> 3t(s) Action Shared - state change A 's view B 's view ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------0( faulty rollout ) geo . image =bad ------3.9 A: list deployments scope ={ geo , +2} 4.5 B: read geo . image geo . image =bad 6.1 B: create geo - canary canary . image := bad scope ( stale ): misses canary . image =bad mirroring the image it read the new canary 8.2 A: fix the three mismatches geo . image := good ,+2 geo . image =bad ( stale ) ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Figure 1. The canary anomaly, measured on an AIOpsLab-derived workload and replayed in the case study of §7.3: both agents faithfully execute their assigned tasks, yet their interleaved reads and writes leave a wrong final state. 

agents to operate on mutually exclusive file sets. The ca-nary trace already obeys this discipline (A repairs existing deployments, B only creates new objects), yet the anomaly stands: disjoint write sets address neither of the two rele-vant ACID properties. Isolation (I) still fails because each agent’s reads span the entire shared state: Agent B reads 

geo ’s image while Agent A is mid-repair—exactly the stale-read symptom §2.1 warned of. Consistency (C) then fails as a downstream effect: the final state breaks a global in-variant spanning both agents’ writes—“the canary mirrors live geo ”—because B’s write to geo-canary was premised on an obsolete value of geo ’s image. Partitioning constrains writes; the bug is in reads. 

Fork and merge. A third strategy gives each agent its own copy of the state and merges the copies once each agent finishes, either via physical workspace forks reconciled by Git, human reviewers, or another LLM[5, 13, 41], or via al-gebraic merges using predefined state reducers [28]. Three problems limit this approach. First, the merge itself is hard. A line-level merge (e.g., git merge ) catches textual conflicts but nothing beyond—the merged code can fail to even com-pile, much less preserve each agent’s original intent. LLM-based review can in principle catch what git misses, but typ-ically fails: the reviewer must reconstruct each authoring agent’s intent (e.g., why a specific workaround was used) from the merged code alone, and usually cannot. Second, algebraic merges have narrow applicability. The CRDT fam-ily [43] only handles operations that commute; most busi-ness logic does not, and invariants spanning multiple state items lie outside the model entirely. Third, much of the live state agents interact with—production databases, active Ku-bernetes clusters—cannot be forked at all, making the ap-proach inapplicable. 

## 3 The Goal, and the Gap of Classic Concurrency Control 

3.1 Ideal Goal: Serializability 

The correctness property this paper targets is what classical transaction theory has long called serializability [8, 17]: a concurrent run of several peer agents (not a parent’s sub-agents) over shared state is correct iff its outcome is equiva-lent to some serial order of those same agents, in two senses. 

(i) each agent’s perceived view at every read matches what it would have seen at its serial position; (ii) the final state of every object matches what that serial order would have produced. Applied to the settings of §2.2: a coding session that fires several agents in parallel should leave the repository as if the requests had run one after another, and two agents re-pairing independent cluster failures should leave the clus-ter as if a single operator had handled both, sequentially. The canary anomaly violates both senses: Agent B’s read-ing of geo ’s image is not what a serial execution would have shown it (violating (i)), and the final state, its canary on the bad image, is not the serial outcome (violating (ii)). 

3.2 A Recap of Classical Concurrency Control 

Classical concurrency control distinguishes three operation dependencies between transactions on shared objects [8]: a read-from (wr) where one transaction reads a value another wrote; a write-order (ww) where two transac-tions write the same object; and an antidependency (rw) where one transaction writes an object another already read. Reasoning directly about serializability is hard, as it quantifies over all serial orders and read-from chains, so classical CC narrows to a graph-checkable subclass: a schedule is conflict-serializable iff its precedence graph —a node per transaction, an edge for each dependency—is acyclic, and conflict serializability is strictly stronger than serializability, hence sufficient. Two classical protocols enforce that acyclicity in opposite ways. 

2PL (two-phase locking) : each transaction takes a shared lock before reading and an exclusive lock before writing, holds all locks until commit; conflicting operations block, and the resulting schedule is conflict-serializable by lock-point order [17]. OCC (optimistic concurrency control) : transactions run without locks—reads track the live state into a read set and writes go to a private buffer; at commit the runtime validates that no read has been overwritten by a concurrently committed transaction, then atomically installs the buffer or aborts and retries the whole transaction [26]. Because an agent’s externally visible execution is still a sequence of read and write events on shared objects, both protocols remain correct in the agent setting. What does not carry over are the two assumptions classical CC silently 

> 4

makes: that retry is cheap (§3.3) and that the framework of-fers fork-and-merge semantics (§3.4). 

3.3 Performance Gap Long inference makes classical CC cost-prohibitive. 

Agent transactions are dominated by LLM inference and last seconds to minutes—orders of magnitude longer than a millisecond-scale database transaction. Classical CC was designed under the assumption that transactions and retries are both cheap; in agentic scenarios, neither holds. 

Long lock hold (2PL). Locks that held for milliseconds in databases now hold for minutes. While one agent infers for several minutes after reading a shared object, every other agent waiting on that object blocks. The lock-wait-graph fills up quickly, and deadlocks become routine rather than exceptional. 

Costly re-execution (OCC). A failed validation triggers a full re-execution—all prior LLM inference, all prior tool calls, and all intermediate artifacts are thrown away. OCC was designed for cheap transactions where redo is cheap; neither premise holds for agents. 

Broad read sets. A third factor amplifies the previous two. LLM agents read aggressively: they grep entire repos-itories, list whole namespaces, fetch surrounding context, so the read set is broad. Under 2PL the locked-object set ex-plodes; under OCC the validated-object set explodes; in both cases the failure probability rises with the read-set size. The three factors together turn the agent-CC trade-off sharply against classical protocols. In our benchmarks un-der contention, 2PL deadlocks fire at 0.81 per trial and its mean speedup over serial execution degrades to 1.04 ×; OCC aborts at 0.95 per trial, falls below serial speed (0.93 ×), and pays 1.83 × token cost on retries (§7.2). 

3.4 Functionality Gap Live state cannot be forked and merged. Most classical concurrency-control protocols reach serializability by keeping an in-progress transaction’s writes separable from the published state—either by staging writes in a private buffer and installing them at commit (OCC, snapshot isolation, Spanner [14]), or by writing in place and rolling them back on abort (2PL during deadlock recovery). Both routes assume the framework offers fork-and-merge semantics : an uncommitted write can be installed into the shared state at commit, or rolled back out of it on abort. OCC’s commit path needs install (its abort path is cheap—the buffer was never published, so the framework merely discards it); 2PL’s abort path needs rollback (writes have already gone live, so the framework must undo them). Either way the framework must support at least one of these two state-manipulation operations. For many agentic workloads this precondition does not hold: the framework offers no fork-and-merge semantics, so neither OCC’s install nor 2PL’s rollback is implementable. Take the operations setting of §2.2: a Kubernetes cluster under debugging is a single live system behind a unique URL—it cannot be meaningfully forked, and “installing a buffered deployment into a running cluster” or “rolling back a deployed process that has already had side effects” cannot even be defined: side effects are not reversible by the framework alone. The same applies to production databases with direct writes, third-party APIs with side effects, and any other live framework: each is a single live system whose fork and merge are not part of the contract. The two gaps push toward two requirements on any agen-tic CC protocol. (R1) Optimistic: neither pessimistic block-ing nor whole-task retry is affordable (§3.3). (R2) Writes take effect immediately: live state offers no private buffer or fork (§3.4). §4 shows how agent capabilities make both re-alizable, and what mechanism does the reconciliation. 

## 4 Insights and Our Approach 

4.1 Notify, Do Not Lock or Abort 

What enables a concurrency control beyond lock and abort is the agent itself: an LLM-powered agent has three capa-bilities that classical CC’s transaction model cannot exploit. 

(i) Faced with the broad read sets of §3.3, the agent can judge whether a conflicting write actually invalidates the premises of its plan. Many such writes do not: a peer appending a one-line log entry to CLAUDE.md touches an object the agent read but disturbs no premise it relies on. Classical CC can-not make this distinction and blocks or aborts either way. 

(ii) On a real conflict, the agent does not need whole-task redo: of the operations it just generated, only the few that depended on the now-stale value need rewriting, and the LLM can pinpoint them. When Agent B of §2.2 learns that the repair has replaced geo ’s image, it need not redo the ca-nary task: only the canary’s image field rests on the stale read, and one set_image repairs it, keeping the rest of the deployment unchanged. (iii) Even on a live framework with no fork-and-merge semantics, the agent can produce an in-verse action for almost every external write it issues—a saga-style undo generated from the same context as the original write [11]—so writes that took effect immediately can be reconciled after the fact. On Kubernetes, a kubectl scale 

is inverted by scaling back to the prior replica count, and a kubectl apply by re-applying the manifest it displaced (§6.3). Capabilities (i) and (ii) make the optimistic posture required by (R1) affordable, and capability (iii) makes the in-place writes required by (R2) recoverable. 

Insight. Classical CC, pessimistic or optimistic, is 

mandatory : the runtime imposes the remedy for every conflict, by blocking the conflicting operation (2PL) or by aborting and retrying the transaction (OCC). It has no alternative, because a classical transaction cannot heal itself: application code can neither judge whether a conflict matters nor repair its own effects, so the only remedies that 

> 5

work from outside are to delay it or to discard it. The three capabilities above are precisely what classical CC lacked: a limited but real form of self-healing . The agent can dismiss a conflict that invalidates no premise (i), regenerate the few operations that a real conflict taints (ii), and undo writes that should not have landed (iii). A concurrency control that exploits self-healing must therefore be advisory rather than mandatory: the runtime only informs the affected agent that a conflict may exist, and the remedy is delegated to the agent itself. The mechanism that carries the advice is notification : it replaces the lock and the abort as the load-bearing primitive. 

4.2 Overview: Our Approach 

The insight translates into an optimistic execution disci-pline; §5 develops it into a protocol with a serializability proof, and §6 into a framework. The framework fixes a serial order over the agents at launch and tracks each toolcall’s declared read/write footprint. Every read is fil-tered (§5.3): it returns the value the reader’s serial position should see, so far as the writes issued by then allow (writes of agents ordered before the reader are visible, writes of agents ordered after are screened out). Whether that value is final cannot be known at read time, since an agent ordered earlier may still write the same object; the agent does not wait to find out: it adopts the value as a premise and proceeds with its task, optimistically. Such optimistic execution is reconciled afterwards through two repair channels, split by who decides. When a write lands that may invalidate a premise some agent has already adopted, the framework appends a notification 

to that agent’s context describing what changed; in its next inference the LLM judges whether the change is real for its plan and, when it is, issues corrective reads and writes that patch exactly the affected operations, or a no-op when nothing it relies on is disturbed. When a write has landed in the wrong serial position (a write of lower serial order arrives after it), the speculation itself has misfired; no semantic judgment is needed, and the framework acts alone: it invokes the saga-style inverses the writes registered, unwinds the misordered writes, and reapplies them in serial order. This sketch leaves three design questions. Q1. When and to whom should the framework deliver a notification? 

(§5.3). Q2. How should an agent process a notification once it arrives? (§5.3). Q3. How must the framework cooperate? (§6). 

## 5 Detailed Design: the Protocol 

The approach of §4.2 left three questions—when the frame-work notifies, how an agent responds, and how the frame-work cooperates. We answer them with one protocol, MTPO (Monotonic Trajectory Pre-Order), on a rigorous model: §3.1 named the correctness goal in prose, and stating MTPO’s guarantee—let alone proving it—requires mathematical pre-cision. 

5.1 System Model and Correctness 

Objects and operations. The model partitions the shared external state of §2.1 into objects , the units over which reads, writes, and conflicts are defined: a file, a database row, a Ku-bernetes deployment, or an abstract grouping of these (§6.1); 

𝒪 denotes the object set. What the protocol must know of each tool call 𝜏 is its footprint : the objects it reads, 𝑅(𝜏 ) , and writes, 𝑊 (𝜏 ) . The framework cannot derive the footprint from the call itself—a call’s effects can exceed the arguments it names (a kubectl apply ripples through a reconcile loop), and a general program does not split into a read set and a write set the way a SQL statement does—so the footprint en-ters the system by declaration : whoever turns an intent into a registered tool states its footprint alongside (§6.4), each write carrying its class, blind or RMW (§2.1), and, when reversible, an inverse (§6.3). We call this the latent object schema assumption. The framework totally orders the tool calls it mediates by physical execution time , written ≺𝑡 , and lets each take effect atomically; two calls conflict on footprint 

when one’s write set intersects the other’s footprint. 

Two orders, and notification. Two total orders must stay distinct: the commit order ≺𝜎 , the serial order each agent’s run is judged equivalent to, and the physical execution time ≺𝑡 at which its tool calls actually reach the framework. ≺𝜎 needs a carrier of its own: per object, the 

write trajectory 𝑇 (𝑜) lists the writes on 𝑜 in 𝜎 order, and its materialization —applying each write, in that order, to 

𝑜 ’s initial state (a true composition: an RMW write’s effect depends on the value before it, §2.1)—is exactly what the 

≺𝜎 -serial execution would leave on 𝑜 . Call 𝑇 (𝑜) 𝜎 -monotone 

when its writes arrive in 𝜎 order: the live copy then equals the materialization by construction, and nothing needs repair. But on a single copy the write overlay cannot be buffered (§3.4)—a write lands in place the moment it executes—and nothing forces arrivals to respect 𝜎 . To repair the reads this breaks, the framework fires a notification —a read-only tool call 𝜈 𝑖→𝑗 (𝑜) that hands agent 𝑗 a value written by agent 𝑖 , occupying a ≺𝑡 position and updating only 𝑗 ’s read view. 

Agent assumptions. We assume three things of the agent, A1 –A3 , in increasing novelty. A1 (individual success) : run alone from a state satisfying its premises, the agent terminates with its intent met. This is trans-action theory’s standing premise of individually correct programs [8], with success in place of correctness for a stochastic executor. A1’s precondition is owed by the task layer: the launched tasks must be well-posed , every serial order leaving each agent a premise-satisfying start; else a failure is one of specification, not of concurrency. A2 (well-formedness) : every action on shared state goes 

> 6

through a registered tool, inside its declared footprint, and a delivered notification is consumed before the agent’s next action. The agent thus follows the protocol, generalizing the well-formed transaction of locking theory [17]. A3 (self-healing) : a notified agent heals correctly. It recog-nizes whether the footprint conflict is a premise conflict ,one whose changed value invalidates a premise its plan relies on, and rewrites exactly the pending operations that depended on it. A2 alone drives the serialization-graph argument; A3 enters where notification perturbs a run (next); §7 measures both. 

Notified serializability. Because a notification per-turbs an agent’s run, we certify correctness through two equivalence relations. Notified equivalence (≅𝑁 ): a run with notifications produces the same observable behavior as the interleaving in which every read directly returned its ≺𝜎 -correct value—the notification mechanism merely 

realizes that interleaving on a stale-prone single copy. The relation exists only because of A3: self-healing is precisely the ability to fold a late-arriving value into the plan as if it had been read in place. Serialization equivalence (≅𝑆 ): an interleaving is equivalent to a serial run, the textbook relation. Notified serializability composes the two: the run is ≅𝑁 an interleaving that is ≅𝑆 a serial order in ≺𝜎 .

5.2 Notification Alone Is Not Enough 

Notification by itself does not yield serializability. The proto-col it most naturally suggests is unconditional broadcast : ev-ery agent writes the single live copy directly, the framework notifies every agent whose footprint the write touches, and each notified agent heals, rewriting whatever the changed value invalidates (A3). This is write-update snoopy cache co-herence [21] transplanted to agents. However, unconditional broadcast can run into a livelock ,worse than a serializability violation (Figure 2). The cause is a missing precedence . The framework orders neither agent before the other, so notifications flow in both directions. The two antidependency (rw) edges then close a cycle in the precedence graph, ruling out every conflict-serializable schedule; worse, each agent’s view is overturned by the other’s next write. The classical mechanisms that would impose a precedence are all unavailable on a single live copy: there is no buffer to stage writes, no fork to isolate readers, and no room for locks that an agent would hold across minutes of inference (§3.3). Without a precedence, no agent ever holds a stable view to serve as its premises (§5.3). 

5.3 Our Protocol: Monotonic Trajectory Pre-Order 

Key idea: pre-order. Supplying the missing precedence constructs the stable view as premise, and it is fixed before agent execution: ≺𝜎 becomes a pre-order , assigning each agent a rank 𝜎 𝑗 at launch rather than at commit. A fixed precedence orients every conflict. Notifications flow              

> # initial: x = 1, y = 1 # A1's task: x ← y/2 A2's task: y ← x/2 # serial outcomes: (x,y) = (0.5, 0.25) or (0.25, 0.5) t1 A1: read y = 1 t2 A2: read x = 1 t3 A1: write x = 0.5 → notify A2 (x changed) t4 A2: write y = 0.5 → notify A1 (y changed) t5 A1: heal: write x = 0.25 → notify A2 t6 A2: heal: write y = 0.25 → notify A1 t7 A1: heal: write x = 0.125 → notify A2 ... # x → 0, y → 0: livelock

Figure 2. Unconditional broadcast on the task pair 𝑥 ← 𝑦/2 ∥ 𝑦 ← 𝑥/2 . Every write invalidates the other agent’s premise and every heal issues a new write: the run never terminates, although either serial order would succeed. 

Figure 3. MTPO’s three actions: a filtered read returns only lower-𝜎 values (left); a subscribed notification reports a newer legal value, and the reader decides whether to repair (middle); a write that would break an object’s 𝜎 order first undoes the misapplied writes, then applies (right). strictly from low 𝜎 to high, so the dependency graph is a 𝜎 -monotone DAG and no cycle can form. Each agent thereby holds the stable view the broadcast design lacked: the state of all writers with 𝜎 < 𝜎 𝑗 , which no higher-𝜎 agent can disturb; absent any notification, that view is already the framework state at 𝑗 ’s ≺𝜎 -serial start, supplying the equivalence ≅𝑁 builds on. On the example of Figure 2, the lower rank halves once; the higher rank, notified, halves the new value once more and stops: the serial outcome, reached concurrently. What remains is the machinery. Classical MVTO would keep one version slot per writer and let reads pick by timestamp [7, 40]; but a slot is a value, so that machinery silently assumes every write is blind. RMW writes (§2.1) force the version store to compose: the write trajectory of §5.1 replaces the slots, and inserting a version into it becomes a physical act. The two mechanisms give the protocol its name, MTPO; it maintains one invariant through three rules, stated next. 

The protocol. An agent is quiescent on an object 𝑜 when it has no further write on 𝑜 to issue, and quiescent when this holds for every object and all delivered notifications are consumed (a later notification may re-open it). GlobalQuiet 

is the run state in which every agent is quiescent and no notification is in flight. 

MTPO’s invariant : at GlobalQuiet , every object’s live copy equals the materialization of its trajectory, i.e., live 

> 7

state and ≺𝜎 -serial state coincide. Figure 3 illustrates the three rules. 

Reads pull from the trajectory (wr). A filtered read is a synchronous pull: FilteredRead (𝑗, 𝑜) = 𝑀(𝑜, 𝜎 𝑗 ), the value left on 𝑜 by the entries of 𝑇 (𝑜) with 𝜎 ≤ 𝜎 𝑗 . When those en-tries end in a blind write, this is simply the 𝜎 -greatest ver-sion at or below 𝜎 𝑗 ; an RMW entry, however, composes with everything before it, so in general the whole prefix must be materialized. 

Writes apply speculatively (ww). R2 (§3.4) admits no buffer, so a write takes effect in place at its ≺𝑡 position and joins 𝑇 (𝑜) at its rank 𝜎 𝑗 . Since nothing forces the two orders to agree, a write 𝑤 may be late : some entry 𝑤 ′ of 𝑇 (𝑜) sat-isfies 𝑤 ′ ≺𝑡 𝑤 but 𝑤 ≺ 𝜎 𝑤 ′. Three mechanisms make a late write take effect at its 𝜎 rank, not at its arrival rank, and with it the invariant holds. If a blind entry above 𝜎 𝑗 shadows 𝑤 ,the framework records 𝑤 in the trajectory and never replays it onto the live copy, similar to the Thomas write rule [46]. Readers ranked between the two are served from the trajec-tory. Otherwise the framework applies 𝑤 after undoing the suffix above 𝜎 𝑗 in descending 𝜎 , using the inverse each write carries (§6.3). Last, a write whose tool admits no inverse is held until every agent with 𝜎 < 𝜎 𝑗 has committed (§6.3): it never speculates, hence is never late. 

Notifications push to readers (rw). When a lower-𝜎 

writer touches an object some higher-𝜎 agent already read, the framework delivers 𝜈 𝑖→𝑗 (𝑜) , carrying the refreshed 

𝑀(𝑜, 𝜎 𝑗 ), at the receiver’s next inference. A quiescent receiver is re-opened. 𝐴 𝑗 may keep, rewrite, or retract its pending operations (A3). Classical MVTO would abort the reader here; MTPO instead refreshes it, trading the abort for a reorder [33]. The pull/push division mirrors the two dependencies of §3.2. A read-from (wr) edge needs a lower-𝜎 value, and only the pull can select one: no push can stop an agent from seeing the too-new value already on the live copy. An antidependency (rw) edge runs the other way, from lower-𝜎 writer to higher-𝜎 reader, exactly the direction the push travels. A two-way notification would reintroduce the cycle of §5.2. 

Correctness. We sketch a proof that the three rules de-liver notified serializability by constructing the interleaving that ≅𝑁 refers to and then showing its precedence graph acyclic. 

Proposition (notified serializability). Assume A1–A3 and the MTPO rules. At GlobalQuiet, the run is notified-serializable in ≺𝜎 order, and every object’s final state is what the ≺𝜎 -serial execution leaves. 

Proof sketch. Step 1 (construct the schedule by ≅𝑁 ). Aprecedence graph is defined over a schedule [8], but a run under MTPO is not a schedule: the framework undoes writes to keep each trajectory 𝜎 -monotone and notifies agents to refresh their views, while a schedule contains agent operations only. Let 𝐼 be the interleaving in which every read and write takes effect exactly once, at its 𝜎 

rank, and every read returns 𝑀(𝑜, 𝜎 𝑗 ) of the trajectory at GlobalQuiet. The run is ≅𝑁 -equivalent to 𝐼 in two ways. Writes match exactly by the invariant, since the framework removes the 𝜎 -backward ww edges. Reads match because the notified agent rewrites exactly the operations that depended on the changed value, behaving as if it had read the value in place, which resolves the 𝜎 -backward rw edges. 

Step 2 (conflict-serializable by ≅𝑆 ). In 𝐼 every operation sits at its agent’s 𝜎 rank, so every wr, ww, and rw edge of the precedence graph points 𝜎 -forward and the graph is a DAG: 

𝐼 is conflict-serializable, with 𝜎 itself the serial order [8]. 

## 6 The Framework 

We realize MTPO as CoAgent, a single layer of toolcall middleware between the agent framework and the target system. Every Worker toolcall passes through it: the middleware injects the caller’s pending notifications, dispatches the call, and returns the result with any raised during dispatch; notifications can ride on returns because the protocol requires only arrival before the receiver’s next inference (§5.1). The middleware ships as a plug-in and requires three capabilities from the host, each matching one protocol need: custom tool registration (to interpose), a commit hook (to hold commit until pending notifications drain, the GlobalQuiet premise of §5.3), and an A2A channel (§6.4); all three are standard in LangGraph, OpenAI Agents, Claude Code, and the MCP/A2A specifications [2, 28, 35]. The section follows what the rules consume: the objects reads and writes range over (§6.1), the toolcalls held to their declared footprints(§6.1), the three routes that serve a read in 𝜎 order (§6.2), the structure that makes writes undoable (§6.3), and the usability problem the discipline creates (§6.4). 

6.1 The Object Tree and Constrained Tools 

The protocol’s rules range over objects, so the system must first fix what an object is. Objects are organized as a tree, containing two kinds of nodes: Natural objects are units the target system already names: a file, a directory. Abstract ob-jects are units the agent reasons about but no single arti-fact embodies: a Spark instance, a cluster. Nodes instantiate lazily, on first mention by a toolcall, keep a stable identity for the session, and carry the object’s write trajectory (§5.3): its writes in 𝜎 order. Every toolcall declares the objects it reads and writes: each tool registers as a structured call whose designated parameters carry object ids, so the middleware reads 𝑅(𝜏 ) 

and 𝑊 (𝜏 ) off the invocation. The declaration must also hold at execution; enforcement follows the operation class. The Worker never writes the request itself: it fills the named slots of a structured header , a fixed envelope per tool, and the framework assembles the wire payload, binding each slot to its declared object id. 

> 8

6.2 Reads in 𝜎 Order: Snapshot or Undo 

MTPO requires each read to return the 𝜎 -correct value, the materialization of the trajectory prefix at or below the reader’s 𝜎 (§5.3); the live copy does not honor 𝜎 , since a higher-𝜎 write may land before a lower-𝜎 read arrives. The middleware serves such a read by the cheapest of three routes that applies. 

Replay on a materialization. When state is cheap to copy (files, key-value records, versioned documents), the middleware retains a materialization after every write, and a late read executes against the 𝜎 -legal copy: an analysis script runs over the historical files as if no later write existed, and the higher-𝜎 writer is never touched. 

Record the result. Some state cannot be copied, but its read results can: a running container list has no file to copy, so the middleware records the docker ps output after every write under that object, and a late docker ps returns the last 

𝜎 -legal recording. The cost is one read per write; the higher-

𝜎 container is never rolled back. 

Live access, backed by undo. What remains must run live: an arbitrary SQL query can only run on the database itself (copying it after every write is prohibitive), and a read– modify–write must compose with the writes before it (§2.1), since an increment computed on a historical copy does not transplant onto the current state. For both, the middleware brings the live object to the caller’s 𝜎 position: it undoes, in descending 𝜎 , every write above that position, lets the call execute, and notifies each undone agent, which decides whether to retry (§5.3). This route presupposes that every write can be undone; the next subsection makes that hold. 

6.3 Undoability: Three-Phase Toolcalls 

The undo of §6.2 needs an inverse for every write it may revoke, and synthesizing one after the fact is often impos-sible: the write destroys the information the inverse needs, and nothing reconstructs DROP DATABASE foo once it has run. Undoability is therefore established when the tool is built, before any conflict can arise. Every tool is written in three segments: prepare runs immediately before exec in a framework-allocated tmp directory and captures every-thing the inverse will need (for the DROP : a dump of schema and rows); exec carries the tool’s intent and modifies the target system; reverse is a self-contained script the frame-work may invoke at any time to restore the pre-exec state. The tmp directory is cleared at the owning session’s commit, since commit means no further undo. A few operations admit no reverse at any cost: sending external mail, executing a payment. Such a tool is tagged 

unrecoverable at registration; the middleware refuses its calls until every lower-𝜎 agent has committed, then pushes an unlock notification. Concurrency is lost only where no cheaper resolution exists. 

Figure 4. On request, the ToolSmith builds binding-carrying tools on the fly; Worker reads and writes go only through them, under framework control. 

6.4 Generality: The ToolSmith 

The discipline above creates a usability problem. Agents are effortless to deploy because one bash covers most of the computing world; bash tracks no read or write set, so this system cannot admit it, and reimplementing every action by hand as a declared three-phase toolcall would cost more than the concurrency it buys. Nor can the Worker build its own tools: exploration happens precisely where no regis-tered tool exists yet, so those accesses carry no footprint; an untracked read plants a premise the protocol cannot pro-tect, an untracked write changes state without notifying its readers. The way out is an asymmetry the protocol itself supplies: every conflict in §5 is caused by a write, so an agent that never writes the target system invalidates no premise and needs no concurrency control at all. The framework there-fore hands tool supply to a privileged tool-building agent, the CoAgent ToolSmith , unconstrained in reading the target system and forbidden to mutate it. The ToolSmith works in two phases (Figure 4): on first contact with a new target system, a bootstrap skill drives discovery (list CRDs, namespaces, and verbs on Kubernetes; fetch the schema and probe the RPC surface on MCP) and seeds the object tree and a base tool set from templates (a declarative interface accepts definitions supplied ahead of time); it then stays resident, co-running with the Workers. When a Worker hits a need no registered tool covers, it sub-mits a synthesis request over A2A, in natural language or, more precisely, as the bash command it wants to run. The ToolSmith synthesizes from the description or audits the command: it marks the read and write sets, registers objects the tree lacks, attaches prepare and reverse , and returns a constrained tool, complete or as a template whose hole the Worker fills. The Worker keeps bash -level reach, yet ev-ery write it issues flows through a footprint-bound tool. The ToolSmith’s context carries every registered tool, so similar requests deduplicate to an existing one; at steady state most 

> 9

requests hit the table and the overhead amortizes toward zero. The latent object schema of §5.1 is grown exactly this way: seeded at first contact, extended per request at run-time. 

## 7 Evaluation 

This section answers three questions. (Q1) Does MTPO resolve the concurrent-state-access problem at a cost-performance point better than 2PL and OCC? (Q2) What does a concurrency anomaly look like under a real run, and how do 2PL, OCC, and MTPO each respond to it? (Q3) 

When a target system ships no tool table at all, can the framework grow one online, and at what cost? 

7.1 Setup 

Environment. All experiments run on one dual-socket In-tel Xeon E5-2650 v4 server (24 physical cores / 48 threads, 2.20 GHz; 125 GiB DDR4; 1.8 TB NVMe SSD; Ubuntu 22.04). The K8s scenarios run against a single-node kind cluster on the same host. 

Models. Worker agents use deepseek-v4-flash 

through the OpenRouter endpoint. A token-rate audit watches for throttling, reconnects, and queueing; any trial that trips one of these is discarded and rerun, so reported wall-clocks are not polluted by supply-side jitter. 

Benchmarks. WorkBench [44] is a simulated office au-tomation harness over five domains (CRM, calendar, email, analytics, project management), driving an agent through natural-language business tasks. AIOpsLab [12], from Microsoft Research, supplies live microservice incident investigation and remediation tasks (port misconfigura-tion, image rollback, permission revocation, and the like) and operates a real K8s cluster through bash . Neither benchmark was designed for concurrent agents: tasks in each suite are mutually independent and never race for the same object. We therefore pick five tasks from each suite as the agent-1 workload and hand-construct a matching agent-2 for each, chosen so the pair exhibits a textbook concurrency anomaly. Each cell ships with a set of hand-written invariants : any concurrent execution must be equivalent to either agent-1 ⋅ agent-2 or agent-2 ⋅ agent-1 ;a run satisfying neither is recorded as a violation. 

Protocols. Five protocols are tested on the same mid-dleware (§6). serial runs the two agents back-to-back and sets the correctness and wall-clock-upper-bound reference. 

naive runs them concurrently with no coordination, the “probably correct” lower bound. 2PL reuses the declarative bindings to acquire read and write locks; a deadlock detec-tor picks a victim and the saga reverse of §6.3 unwinds it, with the victim’s context cleared before it restarts. 

OCC reuses the same bindings under eager validation; the first rw/ww conflict commits the trigger and aborts the conflicting agent, which restarts. MTPO is the protocol of §5–§6. 

Metrics. For every (cell, protocol) pair we run 𝑁 =10 tri-als and report correctness (the fraction of trials satisfying the invariant), wall-clock mean (relative to serial), and to-tal token-cost mean (relative to serial). 2PL and OCC can livelock, so we cap retries at five: any trial whose victim is aborted five times in a row is terminated and counted as a correctness failure. 

7.2 End-to-End Results 

Figure 5 reports the five protocols on the ten cells across four panels: correctness, speedup over serial, token cost over se-rial, and the cost-versus-speedup Pareto front. 

Serial and naive. Serial is the cost and correctness opti-mum: the model spends no attention on coordination and no tokens reasoning about other agents. Naive is the wall-clock floor; it ignores every dependency and runs the two tasks in parallel. The achieved speedup sits around 1.5× rather than 

2× because per-task latency varies, and a pair’s wall-clock is bounded by the slower task. Naive’s token cost stays near serial (neither agent does extra reasoning), but on these con-tended cells its correctness collapses, as expected of a proto-col with no coordination at all. 

2PL and OCC. Both lift correctness sharply but recover almost no speedup over serial, and add substantial token cost. Trace analysis shows why. Under 2PL, deadlocks fire at a rate of 0.81 per trial: the victim’s progress is reversed and re-driven, collapsing the run back to serial-like latency. The cause is structural: agents read broadly at start-up and take many shared read locks; the moment either tries to upgrade to a write lock the other holds, the cycle closes. OCC fares worse: abort rate 0.95 per trial, mean token cost 

1.83× serial, peaking at 2.33× on the worst case, each abort billing the discarded work a second time. This is the classical heavy-contention regime where pessimistic locking edges optimistic out; agent workloads, with their read amplifica-tion (§3.3), sit firmly in that regime. 

MTPO MTPO clears every cell at a correctness, wall-clock, and cost point materially better than 2PL and OCC. The pre-order rules out 2PL deadlock and OCC livelock by construction (§5.3): notifications travel only low-to-high, the dependency graph is a 𝜎 -monotone DAG, and no two agents can wait on each other. Notification then preserves work that the conflict does not actually invalidate: a notified reader rewrites only the affected fragment of its plan (§4.1), and semantically benign syntactic conflicts pass without disturbing the LLM (§4.1). Both effects show up in token cost, which sits within noise of serial. Correctness is ≈ 5% 

below serial: in five of one hundred trials the notification was delivered but the receiver misjudged its relevance to its own task. This residual is an A3 (self-healing) gap (§5.1), independent of the protocol; we expect it to shrink with           

> 10 serial
> naive
> 2PL-saga
> OCC-saga
> MTPO
> 0
> 50
> 100
> Invariant-OK (%)  98
> 13
> 96 93 93
> (a) Correctness
> serial
> naive
> 2PL-saga
> OCC-saga
> MTPO
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> Speedup vs serial
> 1.00
> 1.54
> 1.04 0.93
> 1.43
> (b) Speed
> serial
> naive
> 2PL-saga
> OCC-saga
> MTPO
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> Cost vs serial
> 1.00 1.06
> 1.45
> 1.83
> 1.15
> (c) Cost
> 1.0 1.5
> Speedup vs serial
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> Cost vs serial  better
> (d) Cost vs speed
> serial naive
> (unsafe)
> 2PL-saga
> OCC-saga
> MTPO
> serial naive 2PL-saga OCC-saga MTPO

Figure 5. Five protocols on ten contended cells: correctness, speedup, token cost, and Pareto front, all normalized to serial. A               

> B
> (a) naive 32 s
> A
> B
> deadlock
> wait
> write lock wait
> read lock redo B
> (b) 2PL 53 s
> A
> B
> redo B
> (c) OCC 64 s
> 0510 15 20 25 30 35 40
> wall-clock time (s)
> A
> Bnotify
> repair (d) MTPO (ours) 33 s
> read
> write
> commit
> lock-blocked
> deadlock/abort
> lock wait
> rw conflict
> notification
> repair

Figure 6. The same contended cell under four protocols. 

stronger frontier models or targeted finetuning, and leave that to future work. 

7.3 Case Study 

To answer Q2, Figure 6 takes one of the ten cells and plots the same workload, run under each protocol, on a shared time axis. The cell is the canary case of §2.2: Agent A (the re-pair) and Agent B (the canary) couple on geo ’s image, which B reads as a build premise while A overwrites it, and B’s new canary in turn falls within A’s audit scope. The serial base-line is 50.2 s, and the invariant is the common end state of both serial orders: the canary ends on the canonical image, fully configured. 

naive (31.8 s, 7). This run is the trace of Figure 1: B builds the canary from geo ’s pre-fix image, while A’s range scan precedes the canary and misses it. The two rw antidependen-cies run in opposite directions and cross into a cycle (the two red edges), leaving a non-serializable end state. Every step is correct at the instant it executes: each read returns the then-current state, and each write’s premise still holds when is-sued. No stronger model would act differently; the fault sits in the interleaving itself, the same anomaly databases solve with concurrency control. naive is the fastest precisely be-cause it omits coordination, deferring the cost to the release window. 

2PL (53.1 s, 3). The same two antidependencies surface as lock waits. Both agents read broadly at start-up and hold shared read locks; B’s write-lock request for the new canary falls inside A’s range read lock, while A’s upgrade of geo 

from a read to a write lock is blocked by B’s read lock. The wait cycle closes at 𝑡 ≈ 16 s: a deadlock. The detector selects B as the victim: B aborts and releases all its locks, A’s pend-ing write lock is granted at that same instant, and A writes 

geo and its two other fixes. B then restarts, and its first read hits A’s write lock, now held until commit, and blocks a sec-ond time until A commits and releases; B redoes all its work from scratch. B is suspended for about 21 s and its first exe-cution is discarded entirely, so its wall-clock matches serial and the concurrency gain is zero. 

OCC (63.7 s, 3). Optimistic execution lets both agents run to completion unimpeded, but B’s opening cluster-wide audit pulls the whole namespace into its read set, so each of A’s three fixes hits it (the three red edges converge on B’s single audit at the left). A commits first and validates; B then fails validation at commit and aborts in full, though every write it issued was correct when issued. The abort carries no localizing information, so B can only re-audit, re-read, and rebuild from scratch, discarding about 32 s of first-pass work. 

MTPO (32.8 s, 3). The first 15 s are identical to naive. At 

𝑡 = 15.7 s, the moment A’s write to geo lands, the runtime follows the rw antidependency to B (an in-flight reader that has read geo ’s image) and delivers a one-way notification naming the object and its new value (the blue arrow); nei-ther agent stops. At its next decision point B re-reads geo ,confirms the premise has changed, judges for itself that the only affected element is the canary’s image, and repairs it in place with a single set_image (the green arc). The canary deployment, its label, and its routing entry all stay valid;            

> 11 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
> task processing step (random order)
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> cum. tool count
> 11
> 2
> 12
> (a) Online tool-library growth
> snapshot read
> live read
> mixed RW
> total pass rate wall time cost
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> norm. to Bash = 1
> 45/71
> 63/71
> 102m 82m $0.75 $0.64
> 51m
> 31m
> $0.43
> $0.22
> (b) Bash agent vs CoAgent ToolSmith Worker
> bash agent
> CoAgent Worker
> CoAgent ToolSmith

Figure 7. (a) Online tool growth; (b) bash agent vs CoAgent ToolSmith–Worker. 

nothing is discarded and no time is spent waiting. From A’s triggering write to B’s completed repair is 6.4 s, against about 29 s for OCC’s abort-and-redo. MTPO runs 1.5× faster than serial at 1.20× its token cost. 

7.4 Growing the Tool Table Online 

Every comparison so far presupposes a populated tool ta-ble. For WorkBench the presupposition is free: its baseline tools already carry categories and signatures, and a one-time rewrite enrolls them in the registration. AIOpsLab is the opposite kind of environment: its native agent drives a real K8s cluster with free bash , and no tool table exists at all. Onboarding it therefore depends entirely on the CoAgent ToolSmith of §6.4. This subsection measures that path with one cold-start experiment: whether the table grows on de-mand, what shape it converges to, and what the ToolSmith– Worker split does to success rate, time, and cost. 

Setup. The workload is 71 AIOpsLab tasks in random order, spanning three application stacks (HotelReservation, SocialNetwork, Astronomy Shop) and four task types (detec-tion, localization, root-cause analysis, mitigation); the tool library starts empty. 2 The full suite is harder than the con-tended cells of §7.1: v4-flash solves those, so here both agents run deepseek-v4-pro and every task is capped at 40 rounds. Before the task starts, a long-lived ToolSmith (one session across all 71 tasks) probes the cluster with read-only bash , registers tools and objects under the prepared-statement discipline, and assigns the task’s initial tool list; a Worker that finds its tools insufficient mid-task sends the ToolSmith a natural-language request, and the new tool is   

> 2AIOpsLab contains 79 problem instances; we exclude eight cases whose fault injection requires Chaos Mesh, which our single-node kind cluster does not run.

hot-inserted at its next step. The baseline is a pure-bash 

agent with the same model, task order, and round cap. 

The library converges. After 71 tasks the library holds 25 tools: 11 snapshot reads, 2 live reads (logs and events re-lated, which no snapshot can reconstruct), and 12 undoable writes (Figure 7a). Growth is front-loaded: half the final li-brary exists after 13 tasks (18% of the stream). ToolSmith time follows the same curve, from 37 s per task over the first half to 16 s over the second, by which point initialization has degenerated into catalog reuse. All 12 write tools found an executable reverse : scale_deployment .

Constraint improves correctness. The CoAgent Worker passes 63 of 71 tasks; the bash agent passes 45 (Figure 7b). Traces attribute the gap to direction rather than capability. The bash agent has no prior knowledge: it probes the open command space until the cap. The accumulated tool table provide such prior knowledge of history faults: e.g. the existence of list_service_ports 

suggests comparing ports. With such a checklist, the Worker resolves the tasks with fewer rounds and with larger success rate. 

Time and cost. CoAgent finishes the test within 4910 s against the baseline’s 6118 s (0.80 ×). Log analysis reveals that the primary speedup stems from CoAgent’s structured tool-call list, which enables the agent to complete tasks with fewer rounds. Cost also lands at $0.64 against $0.75 (0.86 ×), split $0.43 Worker and $0.22 ToolSmith. 

## 8 Related Work 

Concurrency control for LLM agents. A wave of recent systems brings concurrency control to LLM-agent shared state. In the taxonomy of §4.1 all of them are mandatory: the runtime imposes the remedy, and none proves acorrectness property at agent granularity. One route tracks read sets at the tool surface and validates at commit: S-Bus [25] rebuilds per-agent read sets from HTTP traffic and machine-checks a partial isolation property, yet measures 74% of reads on its SWE-bench workload as invisible to that surface; STORM [30] validates file-version snapshots at write time. A second route ports one classical mechanism: conservative 2PL [9], adaptive locking for SQL agents [54], CRDTs [38], MESI invalidation [36]. Atomix [31] wraps tool calls in progress-aware transactions at the tool bound-ary; its measurements reproduce the lock and OCC cost inversion of §3.3. It settles per resource without proof at single-phase granularity, and leaves context-carried premises and agent-level serializability out of scope. SagaLLM [11] wraps sequential planning pipelines in saga compensation and asserts serial-order equivalence for one single agent; but provide no mechanism or proof enforces multi-agent serializability. Our protocol tracks the read view over delivered premises, repairs through notification, and proves serializability there. 

> 12

Classical foundations. 2PL, OCC, serializability the-ory, and weak-isolation definitions [6, 8, 17, 26] ground this paper; our protocol inherits their provability and changes the remedy: classical CC blocks or aborts, ours notifies and lets the agent repair (§4.1). MTPO itself descends from multiversion timestamp ordering [7, 40] and Calvin’s deterministic pre-ordering [47]. Semantic CC [19, 29, 48] extracts concurrency from operation semantics but requires static annotation; our semantic judgment is generated at runtime by the LLM. The optimistic posture with inverse actions follows sagas [20] and Herlihy’s type-specific compensation [22]; GoEX [37] argued for undo in LLM run-times, and MTPO adds the 𝜎 -monotonicity rule that decides when to compensate. Collaborative replication [16, 43, 45] shares our structure of a local view, pending operations, and external updates, but reconciles by algebraic transform or application-supplied merge; ours reconciles through the LLM, and the broadcast protocol certifies joint invariants at quiescence, which convergence alone cannot. 

## 9 Conclusion 

LLM agents increasingly share mutable state, while classical blocking and abort-based concurrency control wastes the long inference work that makes agents expensive. This pa-per presents a protocol named MTPO, which handles agents’ shared-state access conflicts through targeted repair rather than blocking or aborting, while preserving serializability at quiescence. Implemented as CoAgent, this approach pre-serves near-serial correctness and token cost while recover-ing meaningful concurrency on contended workloads. 

## References 

[1] Anthropic. 2024. Claude Code: Sub-agents and Agent Teams. https: //docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code/sub-agents .[2] Anthropic. 2025. Claude Code: Agentic Coding Documentation. 

https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code .[3] Anthropic. 2026. Building a C Compiler with a Team of Par-allel Claudes. https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/building-c-compiler .[4] Anthropic. 2026. How We Built Our Multi-Agent Research Sys-tem. https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/multi-agent-research-system .[5] Anysphere. 2025. Cursor Docs: Worktrees—Run Parallel Agents in Isolated Copies of the Codebase. https://cursor.com/docs/ configuration/worktrees .[6] Hal Berenson, Philip A. Bernstein, Jim Gray, Jim Melton, Elizabeth J. O’Neil, and Patrick E. O’Neil. 1995. A Critique of ANSI SQL Isolation Levels. In Proceedings of the 1995 ACM SIGMOD International Confer-ence on Management of Data . ACM Press, 1–10. doi: 10.1145/223784. 223785 

[7] Philip A. Bernstein and Nathan Goodman. 1983. Multiversion Con-currency Control—Theory and Algorithms. ACM Transactions on Database Systems 8, 4 (1983). [8] Philip A. Bernstein, Vassos Hadzilacos, and Nathan Goodman. 1987. 

Concurrency Control and Recovery in Database Systems . Addison-Wesley. [9] Umut Çalıkyılmaz, Nitin Nayak, Jinghua Groppe, and Sven Groppe. 2025. OptiMA: A Transaction-Based Framework with Throughput Optimization for Very Complex Multi-Agent Systems. arXiv:2511.03761 [cs.MA] [10] Mert Cemri, Melissa Z. Pan, Shuyi Yang, Lakshya A. Agrawal, Bhavya Chopra, Rishabh Tiwari, Kurt Keutzer, Aditya Parameswaran, Dan Klein, Kannan Ramchandran, Matei Zaharia, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2025. Why Do Multi-Agent LLM Systems Fail?. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Datasets and Benchmarks Track .[11] Edward Y. Chang and Longling Geng. 2025. SagaLLM: Context Man-agement, Validation, and Transaction Guarantees for Multi-Agent LLM Planning. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 18, 12 (2025), 4874–4886. [12] Yinfang Chen, Manish Shetty, Gagan Somashekar, Minghua Ma, Yo-gesh Simmhan, Jonathan Mace, Chetan Bansal, Rujia Wang, and Sara-van Rajmohan. 2025. AIOpsLab: A Holistic Framework to Evaluate AI Agents for Enabling Autonomous Clouds. arXiv:2501.06706 [cs.SE] [13] Cognition. 2024. Introducing Devin, the First AI Software Engineer. 

https://cognition.ai/blog/introducing-devin .[14] James C. Corbett, Jeffrey Dean, Michael Epstein, Andrew Fikes, Christopher Frost, J. J. Furman, Sanjay Ghemawat, Andrey Gubarev, Christopher Heiser, Peter Hochschild, et al. 2013. Spanner: Google’s Globally Distributed Database. ACM Transactions on Computer Sys-tems 31, 3 (2013), 8:1–8:22. [15] crewAI. 2024. crewAI: Framework for Orchestrating Role-Playing, Autonomous AI Agents. https://github.com/crewAIInc/crewAI .[16] Clarence A. Ellis and Simon J. Gibbs. 1989. Concurrency Control in Groupware Systems. In Proceedings of the 1989 ACM SIGMOD Inter-national Conference on Management of Data . 399–407. [17] Kapali P. Eswaran, Jim N. Gray, Raymond A. Lorie, and Irving L. Traiger. 1976. The Notions of Consistency and Predicate Locks in a Database System. Commun. ACM 19, 11 (1976), 624–633. [18] Roy T. Fielding and Julian Reschke. 2014. Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Semantics and Content. RFC 7231. doi: 10.17487/RFC7231 

[19] Hector Garcia-Molina. 1983. Using Semantic Knowledge for Trans-action Processing in a Distributed Database. ACM Transactions on Database Systems 8, 2 (1983), 186–213. [20] Hector Garcia-Molina and Kenneth Salem. 1987. Sagas. In Proceedings of the 1987 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data . 249–259. [21] John L. Hennessy and David A. Patterson. 2019. Computer Architec-ture: A Quantitative Approach (6th ed.). Morgan Kaufmann. [22] Maurice Herlihy. 1990. Apologizing Versus Asking Permission: Opti-mistic Concurrency Control for Abstract Data Types. ACM Transac-tions on Database Systems 15, 1 (1990), 96–124. [23] Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang, Jinlin Wang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng Xiao, Chenglin Wu, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2024. MetaGPT: Meta Programming for a Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework. In ICLR .[24] Andrej Karpathy. 2026. autoresearch. https://github.com/karpathy/ autoresearch .[25] Sajjad Khan. 2026. S-Bus: Automatic Read-Set Reconstruction for Multi-Agent LLM State Coordination. arXiv:2605.17076 [cs.LG] [26] H. T. Kung and John T. Robinson. 1981. On Optimistic Methods for Concurrency Control. ACM Transactions on Database Systems 6, 2 (1981). [27] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Sto-ica. 2023. Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAttention. In SOSP .[28] LangChain. 2024. LangGraph: Stateful, Multi-Actor Applications with LLMs. https://github.com/langchain-ai/langgraph .

> 13

[29] Cheng Li, Daniel Porto, Allen Clement, Johannes Gehrke, Nuno Preguiça, and Rodrigo Rodrigues. 2012. Making Geo-Replicated Sys-tems Fast as Possible, Consistent when Necessary. In OSDI .[30] Mengyang Liu, Taozhi Chen, Zhenhua Xu, Xue Jiang, and Yihong Dong. 2026. Multi-agent Collaboration with State Management. arXiv:2605.20563 [cs.MA] [31] Bardia Mohammadi, Nearchos Potamitis, Lars Klein, Akhil Arora, and Laurent Bindschaedler. 2026. Atomix: Timely, Transactional Tool Use for Reliable Agentic Workflows. arXiv:2602.14849 [cs.LG] [32] Moonshot AI. 2026. Kimi Introduces Agent Swarm: Let 100 AI Agents Work for You. https://www.kimi.com/blog/agent-swarm .[33] Shuai Mu, Yang Cui, Yang Zhang, Wyatt Lloyd, and Jinyang Li. 2014. Extracting More Concurrency from Distributed Transactions. In 11th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI ’14) . 479–494. [34] OpenAI. 2025. Introducing Codex: A Cloud-Based Software Engi-neering Agent That Can Work on Many Tasks in Parallel. https: //openai.com/index/introducing-codex/ .[35] OpenAI. 2025. OpenAI Agents SDK. https://openai.github.io/openai-agents-python/ .[36] Vladyslav Parakhin. 2026. Token Coherence: Adapting MESI Cache Protocols to Minimize Synchronization Overhead in Multi-Agent LLM Systems. arXiv:2603.15183 [cs.DC] [37] Shishir G. Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Vivian Fang, Noppapon C., Roy Huang, Aaron Hao, Martin Casado, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Raluca Ada Popa, and Ion Stoica. 2024. GoEX: Perspectives and Designs Towards a Runtime for Autonomous LLM Applications. arXiv:2404.06921 [cs.SE] [38] Sergey Pugachev. 2025. CodeCRDT: Observation-Driven Coordination for Multi-Agent LLM Code Generation. arXiv:2510.18893 [cs.DC] [39] Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, Juyuan Xu, Da-hai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2024. ChatDev: Communica-tive Agents for Software Development. In ACL .[40] David P. Reed. 1978. Naming and Synchronization in a Decentral-ized Computer System . Ph. D. Dissertation. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. [41] Replit. 2026. Introducing Replit Agent 4: Built for Creativity. https: //blog.replit.com/introducing-agent-4-built-for-creativity .[42] Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. 2021. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (4th ed.). Pearson. [43] Marc Shapiro, Nuno Preguiça, Carlos Baquero, and Marek Zawirski. 2011. Conflict-Free Replicated Data Types. In SSS .[44] Olly Styles, Sam Miller, Patricio Cerda-Mardini, Tanaya Guha, Victor Sanchez, and Bertie Vidgen. 2024. WorkBench: A Benchmark Dataset for Agents in a Realistic Workplace Setting. arXiv:2405.00823 [cs.AI] [45] Douglas B. Terry, Marvin M. Theimer, Karin Petersen, Alan J. Demers, Mike J. Spreitzer, and Carl H. Hauser. 1995. Managing Update Con-flicts in Bayou, a Weakly Connected Replicated Storage System. In 

SOSP .[46] Robert H. Thomas. 1979. A Majority Consensus Approach to Con-currency Control for Multiple Copy Databases. ACM Transactions on Database Systems 4, 2 (1979), 180–209. doi: 10.1145/320071.320076 

[47] Alexander Thomson, Thaddeus Diamond, Shu-Chun Weng, Kun Ren, Philip Shao, and Daniel J. Abadi. 2012. Calvin: Fast Distributed Trans-actions for Partitioned Database Systems. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data . 1–12. [48] William E. Weihl. 1988. Commutativity-Based Concurrency Control for Abstract Data Types. IEEE Trans. Comput. 37, 12 (1988), 1488– 1505. [49] Michael Wooldridge. 2009. An Introduction to MultiAgent Systems 

(2nd ed.). John Wiley & Sons. [50] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W. White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. 2023. AutoGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM Applications via Multi-Agent Conversation. arXiv:2308.08155 [cs.AI] [51] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineering. In 

NeurIPS .[52] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 .OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X 

[53] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. 2024. SGLang: Effi-cient Execution of Structured Language Model Programs. In NeurIPS .[54] Weixing Zhou, Zhiyou Wang, Zeshun Peng, Hetian Chen, Yanfeng Zhang, and Ge Yu. 2026. ATCC: Adaptive Concurrency Control for Unforeseen Agentic Transactions. arXiv:2603.13906 [cs.DB]