Title: Self-Evolving Agent Harnesses via Gated Semantic Quality-Diversity

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.13683v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Jul 2026 01:15:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Self-Evolving Agent Harnesses via Gated Semantic Quality-Diversity 

# Xiaotian Luo 1,2 , Fengxingyu Wang 1,2 , Chuanrui Hu 1,2 , Dizhan Xue 1,2 , Yafeng Deng 1,2 ∗

> 1

EverMind AI 2Shanda Group {xiaotian.luo, ethan.wang, dizhan.xue}@evermind.ai, {chuanrui.hu, dengyafeng}@shanda.com 

Abstract 

An LLM agent’s real-task performance is shaped as much by the harness around its model as by the frozen model itself: its prompts, injected knowledge, runtime control, and con-figuration. In deployment the harness is often the only lever available, so improving it automatically is the natural way to raise performance without touching the weights. The hard part is not generating changes but knowing which one truly helped .Self-generated feedback is noisy, and an apparent gain can be a measurement artifact or an edit that merely overfits the tasks it was tuned on. We present a self-evolving agent-harness frame-work that separates proposing changes from crediting them: a language model diagnoses failures and proposes patches, while all sampling, measurement, and significance testing are owned by deterministic code, so every credited improve-ment is trustworthy by construction. Patches populate a gated, categorical quality-diversity archive (GSME) keyed on the (where × why ) pathology an edit addresses rather than the tasks it fixes, an anti-overfitting inductive bias; generalization is measured on a sealed test scored only after evolution. Across seven domains with a frozen open-weight model, the harness is train-selected and scored once on a sealed test; its cred-ited gains there are +9 to +15 .5 pp and retain 86–147% of the training gain, evidence they generalize rather than overfit. The winning patch tracks the model’s dominant pathology, not its size or family: changing the model can change the pathology and the patch, while the same pathology-to-patch match recurs across two model families. What transfers is the diagnose-and-credit loop, not any specific harness. 

# 1 Introduction 

An LLM agent’s performance on real tasks is shaped as much by the harness around its model as by the model itself: the same frozen model, well- or poorly-harnessed, differs sharply in what it accomplishes. By harness we mean the full runtime scaffolding, not only the system prompt targeted by prompt optimization (Zhou et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2024; Khattab et al. 2024; Agrawal et al. 2026), but the injected knowledge, the control loop with its hooks and recovery, the tools, and the configuration. This harness is the lever that elicits a given model’s best performance, and in deployment it is often the only lever available, since the weights are fixed (rented, closed, or too costly to retrain). This scaffolding is nonetheless hand-engineered by experts, which scales poorly 

> ∗

Corresponding author. 

as models proliferate and turn over. So it is natural to ask whether an agent can improve its own harness automatically, by diagnosing its own failures and editing its own harness in a closed loop. A 2026 line of work does exactly this, auto-evolving coding-agent harnesses and reporting gains (Zhang et al. 2026a; Chen et al. 2026b; Lin et al. 2026a; Chen et al. 2026d). But these systems typically credit an improvement by the 

peak pass rate over many rounds (which inflates gains by the noise it maximizes over), usually on a single task set with no held-out split (Ursekar et al. 2026; Hambardzumyan et al. 2026). Such protocols cannot tell a harness that genuinely improved from one that got luckier or overfit; the reported numbers are not auditable. Two difficulties make this hard. First, the hard part is not 

generating changes, which a capable model does endlessly, but knowing which one truly helped : self-generated feedback is noisy, since a single evaluation swings by several points on borderline tasks, an apparent gain can be a measurement ar-tifact (a flaky sandbox, a verifier timeout), and a training-set gain may merely overfit, so a loop that trusts it drifts rather than compounds. Second, even trustworthy feedback leaves 

what to change open: the edit space is large, and a greedy loop degrades two ways, collapsing onto a few safe edits (usually prompt tweaks) once bolder changes fail (Ursekar et al. 2026) and overfitting patches to the specific tasks they were tuned on rather than to a failure mode that generalizes. We there-fore ask: under what conditions is an agent’s self-generated feedback reliable enough, and its search structured enough, that harness improvements compound and generalize rather than drift or overfit? Against these two difficulties we make two innovations, re-alized in a system that pairs a frozen task agent with a separate 

evolver (a stronger model) that diagnoses the agent’s failures and edits its harness while the agent stays frozen (Figure 1). 

First , to make self-generated feedback trustworthy, we sepa-rate proposing from crediting : the evolver proposes semantic (where × why ) patches, but every credit decision is made by deterministic code, a validity gate (re-run infrastructure failures), an activation gate (the patch actually fired), and a paired-2σ significance test, on a sealed test withheld from all decisions, so a credited gain is trustworthy by construction; because every scored comparison runs on the frozen agent and is paired, the split does not confound the gains (§3.2). arXiv:2607.13683v1 [cs.CL] 15 Jul 2026 Second , to search what to change without overfitting or col-lapsing, we organize edits as Gated Semantic MAP-Elites 

(GSME): a categorical quality-diversity archive keyed on the (where × why ) pathology an edit addresses (not the tasks it fixes), with one gated elite per cell and cross-cell recombi-nation, so keying on pathology is an anti-overfitting bias and per-cell diversity resists collapse. Across seven domains from three sources (terminal-bench-2, the EvoAgentBench suite, and AppWorld), the train-selected harness’s credited sealed-test gains are +9 to 

+15 .5 pp, retaining 86–147% of the training gain; the same paired test also flags and rejects harmful candidates. On Ap-pWorld, evolving across three models spanning two families shows that the winning patch tracks each model’s dominant pathology, not its size or family. Our contributions: 

• An auditable self-evolution loop that separates propos-ing from crediting. A complete, reproducible loop over a git-tracked evolution tree: the evolver owns semantics, while deterministic code owns all sampling, measurement, and significance testing, so every credited improvement is reproducible and attributable. 

• Gated Semantic MAP-Elites (GSME), and evidence it earns its keep. The pathology-keyed quality-diversity archive above, plus its payoff: on four of six domains the credited harness is a cross-cell recombination the archive makes available, and accepted edits span all four levers rather than collapsing to prompt edits alone. 

• Held-out evidence that the gains generalize. Credited sealed-test gains of +9 to +15 .5 pp retain 86–147% of the training gain on every credited benchmark, a positive result where the harness-optimization literature documents overfitting (Ursekar et al. 2026; Hambardzumyan et al. 2026; Abdelnabi et al. 2026). 

• Evolved harnesses are model-specific; the loop is what transfers. The dominant diagnosed pathology and the win-ning patch change with the model, a pathology-to-patch matching law : engagement →verify-finalize on one model, careless →submit-verify on two others, the latter replicat-ing across the Qwen and Google families (§4). This re-frames harness self-evolution as fitting a corrective patch to a specific model’s failure distribution rather than discov-ering universally good scaffolding, and locates the trans-ferable contribution in the diagnose-and-credit loop itself. 

# 2 Related Work 

Prior work bears on the three questions our loop must an-swer: what to evolve around a frozen model, how to know aproposed change truly helped, and how to search the space of changes. We take them in turn. 

What to evolve. A frozen model can be improved by edit-ing the scaffolding around it: prompts, tools, memory, con-trol loop, configuration (Gao et al. 2026; Xu, Wen, and Li 2026). Prior methods either search prompts and workflows (Zhou et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2024; Fernando et al. 2023; Khattab et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2025b; Lu et al. 2026; Agrawal et al. 2026) or let an agent rewrite its own code against an open-ended archive (Romera-Paredes et al. 2024; Hu, Lu, and Clune 2025; Robeyns, Szummer, and Aitchison 2025; Zhang et al. 2026b). A parallel line evolves the agent’s 

context or memory rather than its code (agentic context en-gineering, reasoning/experience memory, and self-evolving memory architectures (Zhang et al. 2025c; Ouyang et al. 2026; Liu et al. 2026; Yu et al. 2026; Zhang et al. 2025a)), which our knowledge lever subsumes as one editable sur-face among four. GEPA (Agrawal et al. 2026) is the closest on efficiency, evolving prompts on a Pareto front via natural-language reflection with up to 35 × fewer rollouts than RL; like the rest of this line, it neither gates edits on statistical significance nor reports held-out generalization. At production scale, a systems line updates weights from production workloads (Yan et al. 2026), treating harness evolution as one control-plane axis but, like the optimiza-tion line, not saying how a change is credibly credited . Our frozen-weight, sealed-test measurement is complementary: the credit judgment a control plane needs, established of-fline. 

Closest to us: coding-agent harness evolution. The near-est answers to what to evolve come from a concurrent 2026 line auto-evolving coding-agent harnesses, several on our benchmark. Self-Harness (Zhang et al. 2026a) clusters failed traces by a (cause, status, mechanism) signature, akin to our 

where /why split, and promotes edits by a non-regression rule; HarnessFix (Chen et al. 2026b) maps failures to repair operators; AHE (Lin et al. 2026a) verifies each edit against a self-declared prediction (terminal-bench-2 69 .7 → 77 .0); 

Meta-Harness (Lee et al. 2026) searches harness code with an agentic proposer; HarnessX (Chen et al. 2026d) reports multi-benchmark gains; and EvoTrainer (Chen et al. 2026a) co-evolves weights and harness, whereas we freeze weights to isolate the harness. We build on this line and add three elements it has not combined: a categorical quality-diversity archive keyed on the diagnosed pathology, with cross-cell recombination; a paired-2σ significance gate alongside a measurement-validity gate; and a retention scalar on a test withheld from all decisions and scored once. 

How to know a change helped. All of the above accept edits without statistical validation. VeRO (Ursekar et al. 2026) is the closest: access-controlled train/val/test splits documenting how agent self-optimization overfits; it estab-lishes the held-out discipline we adopt but is a measure-ment substrate, not a method, and reports no retention scalar (related: validation-gated skill edits (Yang et al. 2026) and direct optimizer ranking (Ong et al. 2026)). AIRA_2 (Ham-bardzumyan et al. 2026) argues some reported overfitting is evaluation noise , not memorization, motivating exactly our paired-significance and measurement-validity gates, while benchmark-gaming and contamination work (Abdelnabi et al. 2026; Ishida, Lodkaew, and Yamane 2025) motivates with-holding the test set. Against this, our result is positive : in a frozen-27B, long-horizon regime the evolved harness’s gains largely survive on a sealed test. 

How to search. Quality-diversity supplies our search tem-plate. MAP-Elites (Mouret and Clune 2015; Cully and Demiris 2018) illuminates a behavior space by keeping an Figure 1: The self-evolution loop. A Task Agent runs the train tasks; Scoring returns per-task results and failure signals; the Evolver diagnoses ( where ×why ) pathologies and designs patches, a preflight prune dropping inert candidates before any rollout. Persistent state (GSME archive + git tree) is written only by gated commits; the best harness is scored once on the sealed test. elite per descriptor cell. Recent work applies it to LLMs with 

hand-defined structural prompt descriptors (Santos, Julia, and do Nascimento 2025) or learned/embedding descrip-tors (Guo, Wu, and Yiu 2026). Our descriptor is neither measured nor learned but an LLM-assigned ( where × why )

pathology of the harness ; combined with quality-biased selection and cross-cell recombination, this categorical, pathology-keyed archive is, to our knowledge, absent from prior QD-for-LLM work. 

Proposals and measurements. The search is only as good as its proposals and measurements. Failure attribution in (multi-)agent systems is active (Zhang et al. 2025d; Chen et al. 2026c; In et al. 2026); our why labeling is a single-agent instance, and reflection studies (Huang et al. 2026; Zhu et al. 2025) find root-cause diagnosis where even strong models fail most (end-to-end below 30% ; stronger models’ errors re-sist self-correction (Li 2026)), the fallibility our propose-but-never-credit split survives. Lin et al. (2026b) find the capacity to produce harness updates model-tier-flat; we revisit this for diagnosis quality . Our anchor screening ( ≈0.5-pass tasks) is the dual of discarding all-pass/all-fail prompts (Xiong et al. 2025; Chen et al. 2025). 

# 3 Method 

We fix what may change (mutable surface vs. kernel), then give the loop that changes it, the GSME archive that organizes what it finds, and the gates that decide what is credited. 

## 3.1 Problem setup: harness vs. kernel 

We fix a model M (weights frozen) and define an agent as M

wrapped in a harness H, the deterministic scaffolding that turns M into a task-solving system: the system/role prompt, injected knowledge and tool definitions, the control loop (it-eration, recovery, finalization), and runtime configuration. Self-evolution searches over H with M held constant. Not all of H is mutable. We partition it into a kernel 

that evolution must not touch (measurement and evaluation code, the self-evolution machinery, and the product/interface contract) and the mutable surface X . A kernel-touching patch is rejected at apply time; every accepted patch is env-gated and defaults off, so the unevolved harness is byte-identical to vanilla. Each edit carries a two-axis coordinate. where names the surface it touches, coarsened to four levers: prompt ,

knowledge (retrieved context, docs, demonstrations, skills, memory), runtime (control loop, hooks, recovery), and con-fig (numeric knobs); the prompt/knowledge split mirrors the instruction-vs-demonstration distinction in prompt optimiza-tion (Khattab et al. 2024). why names the failure pathology 

it addresses (a small, evolvable set: method lock-in, thinking-runaway, premature finalization, . . . ). where is bound me-chanically from the edited file; why is assigned by the diag-nosing model, concentrating modeling error on that axis. 

## 3.2 The self-evolution loop 

A running example. We illustrate with the BrowseComp+ lineage (Figure 2). The frozen model shows two failures: it exhausts its token budget mid-reasoning and returns an empty turn (thinking-runaway), and it finalizes without checking its answer. The loop diagnoses two (runtime) pathologies and credits a patch for each on train, selective recovery ( +6 .1 pp) and a verify-finalize self-check ( +9 .8 pp); their cross-cell recombination beats either alone and generalizes ( 16 .9 →

30 .8 sealed, +13 .9 pp, credited). We return to it at the archive and the results. Cold start (once per model × domain). We score vanilla on the full train set at K=3 for a per-task thick ledger (the baseline lock and source of all variance estimates, §3.2); the diagnosing model reads vanilla’s failing trajectories into a 

failure map of {pathology ( why ), tasks, a soft where hint}. 

Each round follows the funnel of Figure 1 (precise proto-col in Algorithm 1). The evolver reads the previous round’s trajectories ( train only ) and designs 3–4 env-gated candi-dates; a zero-inference preflight drops any that declare no activation beacon or whose trigger never fired; the rest are screened on the anchor subset at K=1 , and survivors are con-firmed on the full set at K=3 and sent through the three gates (§3.4). The best harness becomes the next round’s parent, or the parent is kept and re-diagnosed if none beats vanilla. 

Termination. Stop when no candidate beats vanilla on train for P consecutive rounds or a round cap R is reached (P =10 , R=20 ); termination never consults the test set. 

Sampling. Evaluation cost is the binding constraint, so candidates pass through three layers of increasing cost. Because a paired comparison needs matched per-task out-comes (unlike methods that collapse a benchmark to one score (Maia Polo et al. 2024; Perlitz et al. 2024)), subsets only 

screen and navigate ; the credited effect is always the full set at 

K=3 under a per-task paired test. A probe (∼15 –30 anchor tasks at K=1 , drawn by per-task Bernoulli variance) culls only egregious losers at a data-driven margin ( 1.5 σscreen ;App. B); an estimator (a stratified K=3 subset, the full set on our small benchmarks) drives round-to-round navigation; and the full set at K=3 gives the cold-start baseline and the final credited number, never a subset headline. Running full 

K=3 throughout yields a complete ground truth, and from it a reusable finding: tree-aware score borrowing reproduces every credited decision at 67% fewer child trials (Theorem 1; validated offline 14 /14 and live 7/7; App. B), a recipe for cutting evaluation cost as benchmarks grow. 

Division of labor. The loop splits cleanly: the evolver owns the semantic steps (reading trajectories, assigning why , de-signing and writing patches), while deterministic code owns everything reproducible (sampling, the gates, aggregation, the paired test, bookkeeping). The model never performs the quantitative judgments; they are computed, not estimated, for reproducibility and because arithmetic is error-prone for an LLM. The loop runs end-to-end : an LLM agent (Claude Opus 4.8 through Claude Code) executes a fixed operating procedure for the full cycle, reading trajectories, diagnosing the why pathology, authoring and applying patches, launch-ing scoring, and advancing rounds. The measurement layer (sampling, the gates, the paired test, aggregation) is deter-ministic scripted code the agent invokes but never computes itself, keeping every credited number reproducible and out of the model’s hands. The operator launches the run; the content of every edit is the model’s. 

## 3.3 Gated Semantic MAP-Elites (GSME) 

The loop generates and measures candidates; the archive decides what is kept, and on what axis diversity is preserved. 

Figure 2: Evolution tree (running example, BrowseC-omp+). Nodes are git commits (RBR = reasoning-budget recovery, VF = verify-finalize, QD = query-decompose). Of the three round-1 recombinations only VF +RBR is syner-gistic (⋆; sealed +13 .9 pp, credited); the others match their stronger component, and four follow-ups fail to beat it. 

Descriptor. Each edit is placed in a cell of a categorical 

archive indexed by ( where × why ). The descriptor is se-mantic , assigned by the diagnosing model from the failure trajectory rather than measured from the rollout, and keyed on the pathology an edit addresses , not the tasks it fixes. This is the anti-overfitting bias: search is organized by failure type ,not training-task identity. The pathology comes free from the diagnosis step (no descriptor to learn or hand-engineer) and yields an interpretable coverage map (App. Fig. 4). Since the label only steers exploration and never decides credit, the archive degrades gracefully under label noise (App. B). 

Archive. One gated elite per cell (a patch enters only after clearing the gates of §3.4). The archive is categorical and coarse (a handful of pathology cells), not a dense grid. A separate elite per pathology counters a reported failure mode where naive optimizers collapse toward safe prompt edits once ambitious changes fail (Ursekar et al. 2026); our ac-cepted edits span prompt, runtime, config, and hook levers, not prompts alone (App. Fig. 4). 

Selection & variation. Canonical MAP-Elites selects cells uniformly to illuminate the whole behavior space; our goal is narrower, to find the single best harness under a tight budget. So we use quality-biased selection (each round extends the global-best harness) with cross-cell recombination (stack-ing it with elites from other cells): the budget goes to the champion while recombination still exploits the archive’s di-versity, keeping the anti-overfitting benefit without uniform illumination’s cost. On four of six domains the selected har-ness is such a recombination (Figure 2). We do not claim uniform-selection or dense-grid MAP-Elites. 

Evolution tree. The archive’s substrate is a git tree: each candidate is a branch + commit (root = vanilla) with a per-node ledger (parent, status, activation spec, where /why ,touched files), an auditable record for structure and de-duplication while git holds the code. 

## 3.4 Three gates 

A patch is credited only after clearing three gates, applied in increasing order of cost. 

The validity gate. Before scoring, an environment health pre-check (sandbox, network, dependencies, verifier output) rejects a dirty environment. After scoring, infrastructure fail-ures (missing verifier output, sandbox crash, verifier timeout) are not counted as agent failures: the trial is re-run up to twice and the environment repaired, and a task that still fails infra is scored 0 but kept in the denominator . pass@1 uses the total task count throughout, since excluding infra-failed tasks inflates the score (they skew hard) while counting them as agent failures unfairly penalizes; re-running to a real mea-surement is the unbiased middle. 

The activation gate. A patch is credited for an effect only if it fired. Each mechanism emits an activation beacon and a ledger records, per trial, whether it triggered; effects on trials where the mechanism never fired are not attributed to it. 

The significance gate. Single-run pass@1 swings by sev-eral points on borderline tasks ( ≈5 pp), so a deterministic 

rule (“improves a split” or “does not regress”) cannot sepa-rate a real gain from a lucky draw, and accepting such gains accumulates noise. We keep two thresholds distinct. Naviga-tion (promotion, parent selection) uses K=3 mean pass@1 

> vanilla; a credited gain (what we report) requires a paired 

2σ test on the same task set ( σ from per-task paired differ-ences, z ≥ 1.96 ). Pairing removes between-task difficulty variance, so the paired threshold is well below the unpaired one; we publish the per-task differences so σ is auditable. The gates decide what is credited; what we report is mea-sured on a sealed test withheld from the evolving agent throughout and scored once after evolution (no test signal informs diagnosis, design, parent selection, or termination), and summarized by retention , the held-out lift as a fraction of the training lift. Enforcing the withholding mechanically is future work. 

# 4 Experiments 

## 4.1 Setup 

Harness-only evolution, with the frozen model never up-dated. The seven-domain main results use qwen3.6-27B ; the cross-model study (Table 3) additionally evolves two further frozen models on AppWorld, Qwen3.5-397B-A17B-GPTQ-Int4 and Gemini 3 Flash (a non-Qwen API model). The evolver’s diagnoser D (a separate, stronger model, D̸ = M )is Claude Opus 4.8, driven through Claude Code to run the loop end-to-end (§3.2); D is reported for reproducibility, Table 1: Sealed-test lift, significance, retention. z is the per-task paired statistic ( |z| ≥ 1.96 is the credit bar); retention 

= sealed ÷train lift. Absolute rates in Fig. 3. Benchmark train ∆ sealed ∆ z retention TB2 +6 .3 +9.3 2.71 147% 

LiveCode +15 .8 +13 .7 2.65 86% 

Omni-MATH +10 .1 +11 .7 3.66 115% 

BrowseComp+ +15 .8 +13 .9 3.96 88% 

GDPval +8 .4 +9.2 2.13 109% 

AppWorld +17 .8 +15 .5 6.44 87% 

SWE-bench +13 .9 +5 .1 0.78 37% 

not required. Seven domains across three sources: terminal-bench-2 (TB2; terminal), the EvoAgentBench suite (Live-Code / Omni-MATH / BrowseComp+ / GDPval / SWE-bench; code / math / web / professional-deliverable / reposi-tory), and AppWorld (app/API). Six are credited on disjoint train/ sealed -test splits (Table 1, top six); the seventh (SWE-bench) is preliminary (bottom row) and analyzed at the end of this section. K=3 attempts per task; per-task success (pass@1, except GDPval’s graded rubric ≥ 0.6) with de-nominator = total tasks (§3.4); env-gated patches default off 

= vanilla byte-identical. The train-selected harness is scored 

once on the sealed test, never consulted during evolution (§3.4). Verifiers: TB2 harbor (timeout-fair overlay); Live-Code lcb_runner ; Omni-MATH / BrowseComp+ LLM judge (pass = reward 1.0); GDPval graded rubric (pass =

reward ≥ 0.6); AppWorld task-success check. 

## 4.2 Main results 

The train-selected harness improves over vanilla on the sealed test of every benchmark, and every sealed-test gain clears the paired 2σ credit bar (Table 1, Figure 3). Gains are +9 to +15 .5 pp; the recurring cross-domain win is harness-level recovery of the frozen model’s dominant failure mode (empty “thinking-runaway” turns), on several domains stacked with a finalize self-check (VF). Our running exam-ple, BrowseComp+, is one such recombination (recovery +

verify-finalize), credited at +13 .9 pp on the sealed test. The seventh domain, SWE-bench (repo-level bug fixing), runs under the same loop on the suite’s canonical 101 /26 

train/test split. The train-selected harness, a repeated-tool-call breaker (nudge to change approach after three identical calls) stacked on a verify-falsify finalize check, is strongly credited on training (+13 .9 pp, n=101 ) and lifts the held-out set in the same direction ( +5 .1 pp). We credit only what the sealed test confirms, and at n=26 even a real +5 pp effect sits below the paired-2σ bar ( z=0 .78 ); we report SWE-bench as 

preliminary rather than stretch the bar to fit. Train and test are disjoint by construction, so its low apparent retention is noise at n=26 , not overfitting; a larger held-out set is the natural follow-up, bounded only by SWE-bench’s rollout cost (the highest in our suite). 0 20 40 60 80  

> sealed-test success (%)
> TB2
> LiveCode
> Omni-MATH
> BrowseComp+
> GDPval
> AppWorld
> SWE-bench
> +9.3
> +13.7
> +11.7
> +13.9
> +9.2
> +15.5
> +5.1
> vanilla evolved

Figure 3: Sealed-test success across seven domains: vanilla vs. evolved harness. The six credited domains (solid) clear paired 2σ; hatched: not credited. Details in Table 1. 

## 4.3 Significance and generalization 

All six sealed-test gains are credited : each per-task paired dif-ference clears z ≥ 1.96 on tasks the evolving agent never saw (p from < 10 −4 to 0.033 ; AppWorld strongest at z=6 .44 ,

n=168 ). Each credited number is a single sealed compari-son, the train-selected winner scored once on held-out tasks, so the many candidate comparisons during evolution cannot inflate it (researcher degrees of freedom are spent on train) and no multiple-comparison correction is needed. On TB2 the train-set gain ( +6 .3 pp, n=53 ) sits just under its train 2σ

threshold ( z=1 .60 , high at small n), so crediting happens on the sealed test. The machinery is two-sided : on TB2 it flagged and culled a significantly negative candidate ( −6.4 pp). App-World carries higher run-to-run variance (a vanilla self-rerun drifted ∼9 pp); the VF gain ( +15 .5 pp) far exceeds this floor, but smaller candidate effects were not resolvable there and we do not claim them. Sealed lift retains 86 –147% of train lift: three benchmarks 

exceed their training gain and three retain 86 –88% , with no overfitting collapse. Retention is a ratio, so near the signifi-cance floor it is noisy; the load-bearing claim is the credited held-out gain (Table 1), with retention as corroboration. The gains are not mere variance reduction: best-of-3 (pass@3) also rises on every credited domain ( +5 .6 to 

+15 .4 pp, App. Table 6), so the evolved harness expands the set of solvable tasks , not just the per-attempt hit rate. pass@1 remains our primary, deployment-relevant metric. 

## 4.4 Diagnosis, and the cost of a wrong hypothesis 

The credited wins trace back to a small set of diagnosed pathologies (per-domain diagnosis-to-mechanism map in Appendix C). Two why pathologies recur, each fixed by a distinct runtime mechanism: (i) thinking-runaway empty 

Table 2: Recovery-defense ablation (LiveCode train, K=3 

pass@1; single-variable arms off one vanilla). Selective recovery beats a 16 × larger token budget and a blanket thinking-off toggle: the gain is targeted, not brute force. 

> †

thinking disabled only after a detected runaway. arm max_tokens thinking pass@1 vanilla 8192 on 64 .6+ budget 32768 on 67 .0+ budget 131072 on 71 .1

thinking-off 8192 off 73 .2

recovery 8192 on † 79 .4

turns (the model exhausts its token budget on reasoning and emits nothing), fixed by selective recovery; and (ii) prema-ture/unverified finalization (it stops without a checked fi-nal answer), fixed by a verify-finalize self-check. Domain-specific pathologies add one-off mechanisms (iteration-budget for turn-cap exhaustion, code-/deliverable-finalize for un-emitted outputs). That the loop converges on the same dominant bottleneck across six independent sealed tests is evidence it identifies the true top failure mode, not a per-benchmark artifact. 

why is an LLM-assigned hypothesis , not ground truth: on AppWorld the loop diagnosed a knowledge gap (a PDF-bill task), proposed a knowledge injection, and the gate rejected it (the real bottleneck was capability, not missing knowledge). 

why only steers which candidates to try, while credit comes solely from the paired-2σ gate, so a wrong label costs at most a rejected candidate and never credits a bad harness: “diagnosis proposes, measurement disposes.” 

## 4.5 Cross-model dissociation 

Thinking-runaway is dominant on four of six domains, so does the loop re-fix one qwen3.6-27B quirk? Three obser-vations say no. (i) It is a model property (reasoning-budget overrun), not a harness defect: the vanilla harness already retries empty turns, and the credited recovery is a selec-tive, sticky policy disabling thinking only after a runaway. A single-variable ablation (Table 2) shows this specificity is what matters: on LiveCode a 16 × larger token budget lifts train pass@1 only +6 .5 pp and a blanket thinking-off toggle 

+8 .6 pp, while selective recovery reaches +14 .8 pp; neither a bigger budget nor a one-line global toggle reproduces it. (ii) The credited wins span several mechanisms and lever cells, not one patch. (iii) Cold-started on other models the loop self-evolves their own credited harnesses, not the 27B’s, each targeting that model’s distinct pathology (Table 3). These patches follow a pathology →patch matching law 

(Table 3): each model’s dominant pathology draws a matched patch, credited on the sealed test, that helps it but not mod-els with a different pathology. On AppWorld, where this cross-model comparison runs, the 27B’s dominant failure is empty “engagement” turns (not the thinking-runaway of the reasoning-heavy domains above), fixed by verify-finalize; the 397B and Gemini 3 Flash instead make careless wrong answers, fixed by a submit-verify checklist. Gemini, a Table 3: Cross-model specificity on AppWorld: each patch’s sealed ∆pass@1 (pp); bold = the model’s matched patch (paired 2σ). VF (verify-finalize) targets engagement, SV (submit-verify checklist) targets careless; the careless →SV match recurs across families. model family VF SV retention 27B Qwen 3.6 +15 .5 +1 .2 0.87 

397B Qwen 3.5 +0 .2 +13 .6 1.18 

Gemini Google +5 .8 +13 .5 1.07 

non-Qwen model, reproduces the careless →checklist match (+13 .5 pp, z=4 .15 ), extending the law across model fami-lies , not Qwen sizes alone. Off the diagonal the mismatched patch is near-zero on the Qwen pair ( +0 .2 and +1 .2), a near-clean dissociation; on Gemini the mismatched verify-finalize still gains +5 .8 (z=2 .14 ), a gradient rather than a switch be-cause it shares a verify step with the checklist. A datetime patch, credited on both Qwen models ( p=0 .003 /0.009 ), is a model-agnostic positive control; cross-model absolute rates are per-model, so we read the pattern, not a ranking. 

## 4.6 Ablations: gates and archive 

GDPval illustrates the train-then-seal discipline. The train-selected harness (recovery +deliverable-finalize) is credited on the sealed test ( +9 .2 pp); separately, a recovery +VF vari-ant reached the highest sealed score ( +11 .5 pp) but ranked below on train, so train selection missed it. Train selection is a lower bound on what generalizes: train-only crediting can mis-rank candidates, which is why we credit on a sealed set. Does the paired-2σ gate matter, or would a deterministic “mean improves” rule (as used by prior work) suffice? On TB2’s ten candidate mechanisms a deterministic ∆ > 0 rule credits four, including context-compact , whose activation beacon fired zero times (only the activation gate rejects it). A single-run gate credits a truly-neutral mechanism as a win 

∼60% of the time ( ∼25% as a ≥ 3 pp “win”), quantifying how non-statistical loops manufacture phantom gains; of the mechanisms it credits on train, only the genuinely significant one survives paired-2σ on the sealed test. Two signs the archive earns its keep: on most benchmarks the strongest harness is a cross-cell recombination (only per-cell elites make it available), and accepted edits span all four levers, not prompts alone. Diversity-preserving selection beats greedy hill-climbing for prompts (Agrawal et al. 2026); our question is whether the diversity axis should be semantic :a categorical ( where ×why ) pathology archive rather than a per-task Pareto frontier. We do not compare against a naive task-keyed baseline, which overfits by construction. 

# 5 Discussion 

The cross-model matching law licenses a reading of what an evolved harness is . It is less a better scaffold than a corrective patch fitted to a model’s failure distribution : the recurring credited wins manage a specific failure mode (reasoning-budget overrun, unverified finalization) rather than adding general capability, and the patch is keyed to that distribution, changing when the pathology changes and recurring when it recurs, even across model families. This also delimits where the loop pays off: because it fits a patch to a failure distribu-tion, harness evolution has the most headroom, and the most economic value, on mid-capability models one can deploy cheaply; frontier models fail less and lie outside our scope. Two consequences follow. First, a harness is portable 

exactly as far as the pathology it targets is shared : the careless →checklist patch carries across two model families, while the 27B’s engagement patch helps little on a model lacking that failure. Because one cannot assume a new model shares a given pathology, a new model still needs its own diagnosis. Second, what reliably transfers is the diagnose-and-credit loop, not any specific harness, though the patch it produces recurs wherever the pathology does. More broadly, this reframes how “self-improving agent” results should be read: an apparent capability gain from harness evolution may be a model-specific correction, and only a sealed, paired test separates a genuine, transferable improvement from one fit-ted to the evaluation at hand. Two directions would make the loop more like ongoing practice than a one-off study. On cost, full K=3 re-evaluation of every candidate is affordable at our scale but not at pro-duction scale; the tree-aware borrowing estimator (App. B) is a validated step, reproducing every credited decision at a third of the cost ( 67% fewer trials) by reusing what a candi-date shares with its ancestors, much as a practitioner reuses experience instead of re-testing from scratch. Harder is super-vision: crediting here relies on a per-task verifier, so moving toward weaker or self-generated signals, closer to unsuper-vised reflection, without losing the trustworthiness guarantee is the central open problem. We view cheaper, well-credited evaluation as a prerequisite for that lower-supervision, life-long regime, not a substitute for its crediting challenge. 

# 6 Limitations and Future Work 

Verifier dependence. Our guarantee is relative to the re-ward signal: paired-2σ crediting certifies that a gain is real on the measured metric , not that the metric is valid. The method therefore applies only to domains with a reliable per-task verifier and inherits any gameability of that verifier : a har-ness that legitimately exploits a weak checker would still be credited. Sealing the test set and gating on significance guard against overfitting and noise, not against an invalid reward. 

Proxy objective and short horizon. We optimize per-task benchmark success, a verifiable but short-horizon proxy .Fuzzy or unverifiable objectives (research taste, novelty) fall outside the method, and long-term qualities such as robust-ness, maintainability, and sustained utility are not captured. A credited gain is a gain on this proxy, and we claim no more. 

Improvement driven by repeated scoring. The loop cred-its improvement only through repeated benchmark scoring: every candidate is re-evaluated on graded tasks. This makes evolution expensive and binds it to domains and cadences where frequent scored evaluation is available. Human com-petence, by contrast, develops largely through doing real work under sparse, indirect feedback, with formal graded exams occasional rather than the primary driver. A self-improvement paradigm that leans this heavily on dense scor-ing may not transfer to open-ended settings where a grader is unavailable or the meaningful signal is diffuse and long-delayed; tree-aware score borrowing (Theorem 1) cuts the cost but not the dependence. 

# 7 Conclusion 

We presented a self-evolving agent-harness framework built on separating proposing from crediting: a stronger evolver diagnoses a frozen model’s failures into ( where × why )pathologies and writes patches, while deterministic code owns measurement, significance, and the sealed test, with candidates held in the GSME pathology archive. Across seven domains the credited held-out gains are +9 to +15 .5 pp and retain 86 –147% of training, the same gate rejects harm-ful and inert edits, and changing the model changes both the diagnosed pathology and the winning patch. What transfers is not any harness but the loop that grows one. 

# References 

Abdelnabi, S.; Hicks, C.; Rieck, K.; and Sadeghi, A.-R. 2026. Measuring Security Without Fooling Ourselves: Why Bench-marking Agents Is Hard. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.22568 .Agrawal, L. A.; Tan, S.; Soylu, D.; Ziems, N.; Khare, R.; Opsahl-Ong, K.; Singhvi, A.; Shandilya, H.; Ryan, M. J.; Jiang, M.; Potts, C.; Sen, K.; Dimakis, A. G.; Stoica, I.; Klein, D.; Zaharia, M.; and Khattab, O. 2026. GEPA: Reflective Prompt Evolution Can Outperform Reinforcement Learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Chen, G.; Shi, Y.; Li, Y.; Li, B.; Xu, X.; Wei, H.; Ni, S.; Yang, M.; and Ye, J. 2026a. EvoTrainer: Co-Evolving LLM Policies and Training Harnesses for Autonomous Agentic Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.03108 .Chen, M.; Wang, J.; Liu, Z.; Wang, Y.; and Wang, Q. 2026b. From Failed Trajectories to Reliable LLM Agents: Diagnos-ing and Repairing Harness Flaws. arXiv:2606.06324. Chen, M.; Wang, J.; Mu, F.; Wang, Y.; Liu, Z.; Feng, H.; and Wang, Q. 2026c. Seeing the Whole Elephant: A Benchmark for Failure Attribution in LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (ACL) .Chen, T.; Lu, S.; Zhao, K.; Meng, W.; Teng, H.; Li, T.; Li, C.; Liu, X.; Liang, J.; Zhang, Z.; Xie, Y.; Qu, H.; Shao, K.; and Luan, J. 2026d. HarnessX: A Composable, Adaptive, and Evolvable Agent Harness Foundry. arXiv:2606.14249. Chen, X.; Lu, J.; Kim, M.; Zhang, D.; Tang, J.; Piché, A.; Gontier, N.; Bengio, Y.; and Kamalloo, E. 2025. Self-Evolving Curriculum for LLM Reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14970 .Cully, A.; and Demiris, Y. 2018. Quality and Diversity Op-timization: A Unifying Modular Framework. IEEE Transac-tions on Evolutionary Computation , 22(2): 245–259. Fernando, C.; Banarse, D.; Michalewski, H.; Osindero, S.; and Rocktäschel, T. 2023. Promptbreeder: Self-Referential Self-Improvement Via Prompt Evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16797 .Gao, H.-a.; Geng, J.; Hua, W.; Hu, M.; Juan, X.; et al. 2026. A Survey of Self-Evolving Agents: What, When, How, and Where to Evolve on the Path to Artificial Super Intelligence. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .ArXiv:2507.21046. Guo, D.; Wu, J.; and Yiu, S. M. 2026. Parameter-Efficient Neuroevolution for Diverse LLM Generation: Quality-Diversity Optimization via Prompt Embedding Evolution. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.09781 .Hambardzumyan, K.; et al. 2026. AIRA_2: Overcom-ing Bottlenecks in AI Research Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.26499 .Hu, S.; Lu, C.; and Clune, J. 2025. Automated Design of Agentic Systems. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Huang, J.; Cheng, F.; Jiang, J.; Yu, Z.; and Aizawa, A. 2026. BenchTrace: A Benchmark for Testing Reflection Ability and Controlled Evolution in LLM Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.29225 .In, Y.; Tanjim, M.; Subramanian, J.; Kim, S.; Bhattacharya, U.; Kim, W.; Park, S.; Sarkhel, S.; and Park, C. 2026. Rethink-ing Failure Attribution in Multi-Agent Systems: A Multi-Perspective Benchmark and Evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.25001 .Ishida, T.; Lodkaew, T.; and Yamane, I. 2025. CapBencher: Give Your LLM Benchmark a Built-in Alarm for Test-Set Overfitting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.18102 .Khattab, O.; Singhvi, A.; Maheshwari, P.; Zhang, Z.; San-thanam, K.; Vardhamanan, S.; Haq, S.; Sharma, A.; Joshi, T. T.; Moazam, H.; Miller, H.; Zaharia, M.; and Potts, C. 2024. DSPy: Compiling Declarative Language Model Calls into Self-Improving Pipelines. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Lee, Y.; Nair, R.; Zhang, Q.; Lee, K.; Khattab, O.; and Finn, C. 2026. Meta-Harness: End-to-End Optimization of Model Harnesses. arXiv:2603.28052. Li, Y. 2026. Decomposing LLM Self-Correction: The Accuracy-Correction Paradox and Error Depth Hypothesis. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.00828 .Lin, J.; Liu, S.; Pan, C.; Lin, L.; Dou, S.; Xi, Z.; Huang, X.; Yan, H.; Han, Z.; Gui, T.; and Jiang, Y.-G. 2026a. Agentic Harness Engineering: Observability-Driven Automatic Evo-lution of Coding-Agent Harnesses. arXiv:2604.25850. Lin, M.; Wu, J.; Wang, Z.; Shi, Z.; Sang, Y.; He, B.; Liu, Z.; Wei, T.; Wu, Z.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, D.; Zhang, X.; Dumoulin, B.; Xie, C.; Zhou, Y.; Wang, S.; and Lu, H. 2026b. Harness Updating Is Not Harness Benefit: Disentangling Evolution Capabilities in Self-Evolving LLM Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.30621 .Liu, J.; Ye, X.; Xia, P.; Zheng, Z.; Xie, C.; Ding, M.; and Yao, H. 2026. EvolveMem: Self-Evolving Memory Archi-tecture via AutoResearch for LLM Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.13941 .Lu, H.; Huang, H.; Zhou, Y.; Li, C.; and Zhu, N. 2026. Empirical-MCTS: Continuous Agent Evolution via Dual-Experience Monte Carlo Tree Search. arXiv:2602.04248. Maia Polo, F.; Weber, L.; Choshen, L.; Sun, Y.; Guo, G.; and Yurochkin, M. 2024. tinyBenchmarks: evaluating LLMs with fewer examples. In International Conference on Ma-chine Learning (ICML) . ArXiv:2402.14992. Mouret, J.-B.; and Clune, J. 2015. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.04909 .Ong, K. T.-i.; Kang, M.; Choi, D.; Cho, J.; Kim, S.; Lim, S.; Jang, G.; Oh, M.; Jeong, B.; Kim, S.; Kwon, T.; and Yeo, J. 2026. Towards Direct Evaluation of Harness Optimizers via Priority Ranking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.22505 .Ouyang, S.; Yan, J.; Hsu, I.-H.; Chen, Y.; Jiang, K.; Wang, Z.; Han, R.; Le, L. T.; Daruki, S.; Tang, X.; Tirumalashetty, V.; Lee, G.; Rofouei, M.; Lin, H.; Han, J.; Lee, C.-Y.; and Pfis-ter, T. 2026. ReasoningBank: Scaling Agent Self-Evolving with Reasoning Memory. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . ArXiv:2509.25140. Perlitz, Y.; Bandel, E.; Gera, A.; Arviv, O.; Ein-Dor, L.; Shnarch, E.; Slonim, N.; Shmueli-Scheuer, M.; and Choshen, L. 2024. Efficient Benchmarking (of Language Models). In 

North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics (NAACL) . ArXiv:2308.11696. Robeyns, M.; Szummer, M.; and Aitchison, L. 2025. A Self-Improving Coding Agent. arXiv:2504.15228. Romera-Paredes, B.; Barekatain, M.; Novikov, A.; Balog, M.; Kumar, M. P.; Dupont, E.; Ruiz, F. J. R.; Ellenberg, J.; Wang, P.; Fawzi, O.; Kohli, P.; and Fawzi, A. 2024. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models. 

Nature , 625(7995): 468–475. Rubin, D. B. 1976. Inference and missing data. Biometrika ,63(3): 581–592. Santos, G. M.; Julia, R. M. d. S.; and do Nascimento, M. Z. 2025. Diverse Prompts: Illuminating the Prompt Space of Large Language Models with MAP-Elites. In IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC) .Ursekar, V.; Shanker, A.; Chatrath, V.; Xue, Y.; and Denton, S. M. 2026. VeRO: A Harness for Agents to Optimize Agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .ArXiv:2602.22480. Xiong, W.; Yao, J.; Xu, Y.; Pang, B.; Wang, L.; Sahoo, D.; Li, J.; Jiang, N.; Zhang, T.; Xiong, C.; and Dong, H. 2025. A Minimalist Approach to LLM Reasoning: from Rejection Sampling to Reinforce. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11343 .Xu, T.; Wen, H.; and Li, M. 2026. Adapting the Interface, Not the Model: Runtime Harness Adaptation for Deterministic LLM Agents. arXiv:2605.22166. Yan, R.; Fu, W.; Li, J.; Xu, S.; Mei, Z.; Gao, J.; Zhang, J.; Shen, X.; Dai, H.; He, C.; Pu, Z.; Mei, J.; Lin, Z.; Wang, H.; Ding, Z.; Zhang, J.; Wang, H.; Xu, R.; Jiang, Y.; Wu, Y.; Yang, T.; and Yuan, B. 2026. Next-Generation Agentic Rein-forcement Learning Systems Enable Self-Evolving Agents. arXiv:2607.01120. Yang, C.; Wang, X.; Lu, Y.; Liu, H.; Le, Q. V.; Zhou, D.; and Chen, X. 2024. Large Language Models as Optimizers. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Yang, Y.; et al. 2026. SkillOpt: Executive Strategy for Self-Evolving Agent Skills. arXiv:2605.23904. Yu, D.; Zhang, V.; Wang, H.; Chen, Y.; Hu, M.; Xu, W.; Chen, S.; Torr, P.; Yin, Z.; and King, I. 2026. Dynamic Mixture of Latent Memories for Self-Evolving Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.21951 .Zhang, G.; Meng, F.; Wan, G.; Li, Z.; Wang, K.; Yin, Z.; Bai, L.; and Yan, S. 2025a. LatentEvolve: Self-Evolving Test-Time Scaling in Latent Space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.24771 .Zhang, H.; Zhang, S.; Li, K.; Zhang, C.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Bai, L.; and Hu, S. 2026a. Self-Harness: Harnesses That Improve Themselves. arXiv:2606.09498. Zhang, J.; Hu, S.; Lu, C.; Lange, R.; and Clune, J. 2026b. Darwin Gödel Machine: Open-Ended Evolution of Self-Improving Agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . ArXiv:2505.22954. Zhang, J.; Xiang, J.; Yu, Z.; Teng, F.; Chen, X.; Chen, J.; Zhuge, M.; Cheng, X.; Hong, S.; Wang, J.; Zheng, B.; Liu, B.; Luo, Y.; and Wu, C. 2025b. AFlow: Automating Agen-tic Workflow Generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Zhang, Q.; Hu, C.; Upasani, S.; et al. 2025c. Agentic Con-text Engineering: Evolving Contexts for Self-Improving Lan-guage Models. arXiv:2510.04618. Zhang, S.; Yin, M.; Zhang, J.; Liu, J.; Han, Z.; Zhang, J.; Li, B.; Wang, C.; Wang, H.; Chen, Y.; and Wu, Q. 2025d. Which Agent Causes Task Failures and When? On Auto-mated Failure Attribution of LLM Multi-Agent Systems. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .Zhou, Y.; Muresanu, A. I.; Han, Z.; Paster, K.; Pitis, S.; Chan, H.; and Ba, J. 2023. Large Language Models Are Human-Level Prompt Engineers. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Zhu, K.; Liu, Z.; Li, B.; Tian, M.; Yang, Y.; Zhang, J.; Han, P.; Xie, Q.; Cui, F.; Zhang, W.; Ma, X.; Yu, X.; Ramesh, G.; Wu, J.; Liu, Z.; Lu, P.; Zou, J.; and You, J. 2025. Where LLM Agents Fail and How They can Learn From Failures. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25370 .

# A The self-evolution loop 

Algorithm 1 gives the precise per-round protocol summa-rized in the main text by Figure 1. Every quantitative step (task sampling, the gates, the paired significance test) is de-terministic code; the evolver supplies only the semantic steps (diagnosis, patch design). 

# B Formal analysis 

The loop’s design choices rest on component-level guaran-tees, each with an explicit assumption. We do not prove end-to-end monotonic improvement, which depends on the model’s improvability (the 27B/397B results show model-conditional ceilings); each result below certifies one compo-nent, turning missing or mislabeled data into a bounded cost term rather than a bias. Algorithm 1 Self-evolving harness loop with GSME. 

Require: frozen model M ; vanilla harness H0; train T , sealed test T ⋆; attempts per task K=3 ; diagnoser D (stronger, with 

D̸ =M ); round cap R; patience P

Cold start (once per model ×domain):  

> 1:

L ← Score (M, H 0, T , K ); v ← pass@1( L) # L: per-task ledger; v: vanilla train score  

> 2:

(TA, v A, τ ) ← SelectAnchor (L) # anchor tasks, their vanilla score, cull margin τ =1 .5 σscreen  

> 3:

F ← D. Diagnose (Fails (L)) ; A ← { H0}; stale ← 0 # failure map; GSME archive 

Evolution:  

> 4:

for r = 1 to R do  

> 5:

if r > 1: F ← D. Diagnose (round-(r−1) trajectories ) # train only  

> 6:

{Ci} ← Preflight (D. Design (F)) # n env-gated patches; drop beacon-less or provably-inert  

> 7:

for all candidate Ci do  

> 8:

Hi ← Apply (parent , C i) # git node; where bound from artifact  

> 9:

if pass@1( Score (M, H i, TA, K =1)) < v A − τ then  

> 10:

continue # anchor screen: cull only egregious losers  

> 11:

end if  

> 12:

ρi ← Score (M, H i, T , K ) # infra-fail ⇒ rerun ≤2, else 0 (validity gate)  

> 13:

if ¬ Fired (Ci) then  

> 14:

continue # activation gate: not credited unless the patch fired  

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

if pass@1( ρi) > v then  

> 17:

insert Hi into cell (where i, why i) of A if a better elite # navigation: K=3 mean  

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

parent ← arg max H∈A pass@1( H, T ), recombined with elites of other cells  

> 21:

stale ← 0 if some Ci beat v, else stale ← stale + 1  

> 22:

if stale ≥ P : break # exploration exhausted  

> 23:

end for 

Unseal (after evolution; T ⋆ untouched above):  

> 24:

H⋆ ← arg max H∈A pass@1( H, T ); score H⋆, H 0 on T ⋆ once # sealed test  

> 25:

return H⋆; retention = ∆ test /∆train (∆: lift over vanilla); credit gains passing paired 2σ on T ⋆

Proposition 1 (Measurement validity) . If infrastructure fail-ures are heterogeneous across tasks and scored as agent fail-ures, the archive’s per-cell arg max can flip; admitting only trials with a valid verifier receipt yields an unbiased success estimate on the runnable subset. Proof sketch. Scoring an infra-failed trial as 0 is a missing-not-at-random error (Rubin 1976). Two candidates over two tasks suffice: with true per-task pass rates px = (0 .9, 0.1) 

(score 0.50 ) and py = (0 .4, 0.4) (score 0.40 ) and hetero-geneous infra-survival q = (0 .2, 1.0) , the naive estimates become ˆf (x)=0 .14 < ˆf (y)=0 .24 , so the worse candidate wins. Restricting to admitted trials estimates Pr[ pass | ran ],unbiased on runnable tasks; unrunnable tasks are reported as coverage, not scored 0.

Proposition 2 (Graceful degradation under label noise) . Ajudge mislabel rate ε on the why axis inflates the samples needed to fill a cell by 1/(1 − ε) (a slope, not a cliff) and leaves the deployed harness unchanged, since deployment selects arg max ˆf , whose definition contains no label. Proof sketch. Each arrival is correctly archived with proba-bility 1−ε, so accumulating m correct entries takes m/ (1 −ε)

arrivals in expectation (binomial thinning). Label noise per-turbs only the archive’s bookkeeping, not ˆf .

Lemma 1 (Anchor information and screen noise) . For a task with posterior mean ˆp and effective mass m, one further trial reduces the posterior variance by ˆp(1 − ˆp)/(m + 1) 2, so se-lecting anchors by per-task Bernoulli variance is maximally informative. The K=1 anchor-mean sampling deviation is 

σscreen = p(1 /n 2) P 

> i

ˆpi(1 − ˆpi), and the screen culls at 

1.5 σscreen .Proof sketch. The total-variance identity for a Beta posterior under one Bernoulli observation gives the per-task reduction; summing independent per-task Bernoulli variances gives the anchor-mean σ.

Theorem 1 (Tree-aware score borrowing, worst– case-no-harm) . Let a child reuse ancestor scores with tree-distance discount w(d) = e−λd and borrowed mass α0 =

P 

> i

wikai , giving ˆθc = ( pc + P 

> i

wipai )/(kc + α0). With probability ≥ 1 − δ,

|ˆθc − θc| ≤ α0 ηkc+α0

| {z } 

> bias

+

q log(2 /δ )2( kc+α0)

| {z }

> noise

,

where η bounds the true ancestor–child gap. Capping α0 ≤

∆kc/(4ˆ η−∆) holds the bias ≤ ∆/4 for any η, so a candidate with true margin ≥ ∆ is never mis-ranked and the worst case reduces to the no-borrowing cost. Proof sketch. Split the error into bias ( |Eˆθc −θc|, expectation algebra bounded by α0η/ (kc + α0)) and noise (weighted Hoeffding, using P 

> ℓ

c2 

> ℓ

≤ P 

> ℓ

cℓ = kc + α0 since weights are ≤ 1). The cap solves the bias constraint α0η/ (kc +α0) ≤

∆/4.

Empirical validation. We validate Theorem 1 against full re-evaluation on two real evolution trees, BrowseComp+ (a 23 mechanism factorial, 8 nodes ×154 tasks) and Live-CodeBench ( 97 tasks), each at K=3 . Offline (replaying ex-isting ledgers), the borrowing decision reproduces the full-

K=3 promote/prune decision on all 14 /14 nodes at −67% 

child-trial cost. Live on BrowseComp+ (a fresh, independent 

K=1 pass on all 7 non-root nodes plus borrowed ancestor mass) it reproduces 7/7 decisions with zero flips at 33 .4% 

of the child cost ( 1078 vs. 3231 trials). The cap engaged on every edge, and estimates shrink conservatively toward the parent, never enough to flip a decision in either direction; assumption A3 (tree smoothness) holds distributionally (per-edge |∆p| median 0, mean ≈ 0.18 ). The live run removes the subsampling caveat; the remaining scope is the conserva-tive uniform-cap route (not activation stratification). Because the main results use full re-evaluation (the conservative gold standard), borrowing here is validated against ground truth rather than relied upon to produce it, which is what lets us recommend it: a validated recipe for cutting evaluation cost as harness evolution scales to larger benchmarks. 

# C Per-domain diagnoses and patches 

Table 4 maps each domain to the dominant pathology the loop diagnosed and the credited mechanism that fixed it; sealed gains and significance for these mechanisms are in Table 1. Every credited mechanism is a runtime edit, and two pathologies (thinking-runaway and unverified finalization) recur across domains. 

# D The WHERE taxonomy: the harness’s editable surface 

Figure 4 aggregates the GSME archive across the six cred-ited domains: broad exploration under strict promotion, with credited gains concentrated in runtime . The where descrip-tor has two layers. The lever (four values: prompt , knowl-edge , runtime , config ) is the coordinate the GSME archive is keyed on (§3.3); beneath it sits an operational layer of concrete edit surfaces: the specific files a patch may touch (Table 5). Unlike why (LLM-diagnosed and open/evolvable), 

where is a fixed, closed engineering surface: it enumerates exactly the parts of the harness an edit is allowed to change, which is what makes each patch’s coordinate mechanically bindable from its artifact rather than self-declared. An edit’s 

where lever is read off which surface its diff touches; the 

control arm (no patch surface) exists only for bookkeep-ing. On the frozen qwen3.6-27B, credited gains concentrated in 

runtime and config ; the two in-context levers were limited (the prompt lever’s one clean node, TWP, fired on 158 /159 

TB2 tasks yet produced no gain, and a knowledge injection on AppWorld did not credit). We report this as a model-conditional finding, not a property of the levers in general. 

# E pass@1 vs. pass@3 

Our primary metric is pass@1 (per-task success, averaged over K=3 attempts), the deployment-relevant single-attempt quantity, and the one the paired-2σ credit gate is built on. Ta-ble 6 reports pass@3 (best of the three attempts) alongside it on the sealed test. The gains are not an artifact of variance reduction: pass@3 rises on every credited domain, and since vanilla’s pass@3 is far below ceiling, the evolved harness ex-pands the set of solvable tasks rather than merely stabilizing per-attempt outcomes. 

# F Vendor-reported numbers and our reproducible baseline 

Our vanilla is a reproducible minimal harness (the fixed base-line over which every credited lift is measured), not a ven-dor’s tuned evaluation harness. On terminal-bench-2 it repro-duces an independent minimal-harness reference ( ≈36% ), confirming it is a sane baseline rather than an artificially depressed strawman. Vendor-reported agentic scores for the same open model are substantially higher: the official qwen3.6-27B model card 1 lists Terminal-Bench 2.0 59 .3 (Harbor/Terminus-2 har-ness, 3 h timeout, 32 CPU / 48 GB per task), LiveCodeBench v6 83 .9, and SWE-bench Verified 77 .2. These figures rely on undisclosed, heavily-engineered harnesses, large per-task compute, and specific benchmark versions/subsets, and in-dependent reproduction routinely lands well below them. We therefore do not target or compare against such vendor upper bounds: our absolute numbers reflect a deliberately minimal harness, and our contribution is the lift a self-evolution loop discovers on top of it, certified on a sealed test by paired sig-nificance. That self-reported numbers are themselves hard to reproduce is an instance of the measurement-trust problem this paper sets out to address. 

> 1https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3.6-27B

Table 4: What the loop diagnosed and fixed, per domain: the dominant diagnosed why and the credited mechanism (all on the 

runtime lever). Sealed gains and significance are in Table 1. Benchmark dominant diagnosed why credited mechanism ( where =runtime )TB2 unverified finalize → wrong verify-finalize LiveCode thinking-runaway empty recovery ( +iter +CF) Omni-MATH runaway empty + wrong-answer recovery + verify-finalize BrowseComp+ thinking-runaway empty recovery + verify-finalize GDPval runaway empty + no deliverable recovery + deliverable-finalize AppWorld empty / no finalize verify-finalize SWE-bench repeated-call stall + false finalize repeat-break + verify-falsify 

Figure 4: GSME archive, aggregated across the six credited domains. Rows are the four where levers; columns are open, LLM-diagnosed why classes (the last marks model-capability limits no harness edit can fix); each cell prints a mechanism’s status and one-line reason (verdicts from training splits; sealed scores in Table 1). Takeaways: broad exploration with strict promotion; credited gains concentrate in runtime ; and the boxed wrong-output column is attacked by all four levers but moved only, and only locally, by prompt : the where axis matters. Recombination is shown in Figure 2. Table 5: The where taxonomy: four levers over thirteen operational edit surfaces, with the surface each touches and example patches from this paper. where is fixed (the harness’s editable interface); why is diagnosed and open. Lever Edit surface Touches Example patch (this paper) 

prompt system_prompt_template agent system prompt (templates/*.md )—

task_wrapper_prompt per-task instruction (domains/*/prompt.md )TWP (TB2); datetime-inject (Ap-pWorld) 

judge_prompt evaluation-internal prompt —

tool_description a tool’s description field —

knowledge skill injected skill ( skills/* ) knowledge-base arm (AppWorld; not credited) 

memory injected memory (everos/* )—

runtime hook_new new agent hook (agent/hook/*.py )verify-finalize; code-/deliverable-finalize 

hook_modify modify an existing hook —

tool_new new tool (agent/tools/*.py )—

loop_override scoped loop override —

context_override scoped context/provider over-ride thinking-runaway recovery 

tool_override scoped tool override —

config config numeric YAML/JSON de-faults iteration budget; max-iter; tem-perature Table 6: pass@1 vs. pass@3 on the sealed test (vanilla → train-selected harness, same harnesses as Table 1). Best-of-3 rises on every credited domain; pass@1 is primary, pass@3 is corroboration. GDPval uses its graded rubric ( ≥ 0.6) in place of pass@1/@3. pass@1 (%) pass@3 (%) Benchmark van ev ∆ van ev ∆

TB2 36 .1 45 .4 +9 .3 52 .8 58 .3 +5 .6

LiveCode 58 .1 71 .8 +13 .7 66 .7 79 .5 +12 .8

Omni-MATH 54 .3 66 .0 +11 .7 65 .0 75 .0 +10 .0

BrowseComp+ 16 .9 30 .8 +13 .9 33 .8 49 .2 +15 .4

GDPval 43 .7 52 .9 +9 .2 58 .6 67 .2 +8 .6

AppWorld 41 .3 56 .7 +15 .5 67 .3 75 .6 +8 .3

SWE-bench 47 .4 52 .6 +5 .1 61 .5 69 .2 +7 .7