Title: MR-TGN: A Meta-Role Temporal Graph Network for Team-Level Intent Prediction in Multi-Agent Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.25316v1

Published Time: Wed, 29 Jul 2026 00:32:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# MR-TGN: A Meta-Role Temporal Graph Network for Team-Level Intent Prediction in Multi-Agent Systems ⋆

## Nagarani Brammanayagam a,∗∗ , Devaprakash Muniraj b

> a

Postdoctoral Researcher, Department of Aerospace Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600036, Tamilnadu, India 

> b

Assistant Professor, Department of Aerospace Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600036, Tamilnadu, India 

A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords :Team-level intent prediction Heterogeneous multi-agent systems Latent role learning Temporal graph network Coordinated multi-agent behavior 

A B S T R A C T 

Collective intent prediction in multi-agent systems focuses on predicting the shared objectives and future behaviours of groups of interacting agents. The problem is particularly challenging because collective intent emerges from complex interactions, evolving cooperation structures, and long-term behavioural dependencies among heterogeneous agents operating in dynamic and partially observable environments. Furthermore, functional roles adopted by agents are often latent, may change over time, and are rarely available as explicit annotations, making the learning of coordinated group behaviours significantly more difficult. To address these challenges, this paper proposes a Meta-Role Temporal Graph Network (MR-TGN) framework for collective intent prediction in multi-agent systems. The proposed framework models agents as dynamically evolving graph entities and employs temporal memory mechanisms to encode historical interactions and coordination behaviours. To capture higher-level behavioural knowledge, MR-TGN introduces a memory-enhanced meta-role learning mechanism that derives latent role representations from agent-centric behavioral representations without requiring explicit role labels. In contrast to scenario-specific node memories, the learned role representations are stored as global behavioural knowledge that can be transferred across scenarios, thereby improving the representation of coordinated behaviours in previously unseen environments. By jointly modelling temporal interaction dynamics, evolving cooperation structures, and transferable role representations, MR-TGN enables the inference of high-level collective intents from coordinated multi-agent behaviours. An evaluation methodology for early collective intent prediction is proposed to assess prediction accuracy and timeliness, enabling realistic evaluation of the model’s ability to anticipate collective objectives during the early stages of mission execution. Experimental results on representative multi-agent scenarios demonstrate that the proposed framework consistently outper-forms competitive baselines and achieves effective early prediction of collective intents in dynamic and adversarial environments. 

## 1. Introduction 

Autonomous multi-agent systems comprise multiple in-teracting entities that operate in partially observable, uncer-tain, and continuously evolving environments. These entities perceive their surroundings, make decisions independently, and interact with other agents to achieve a collective objec-tive. The behaviours of the agents are often interdependent because the actions of one agent can influence the decisions and responses of the others. Consequently, the overall system behaviour emerges from the interactions and coordination among multiple agents. Understanding these interactions is therefore essential for analysing collective behaviours and improving decision-making in autonomous multi-agent systems. In adversarial environments, these agents operate in the presence of opponents whose objectives conflict with their own, such environments are highly dynamic because agents continuously adapt their behaviours in response to changing mission objectives, environmental conditions, and the actions of the other agents. As a result, interaction patterns, cooperation structures, and functional roles may  

> ⋆

his work was supported by the Aeronautical Develop- ment Agency under grant no. RB23241328AEADAX008980 and IIT Madras under grant no. RF24250403AENFIG008980. 

> ∗∗

Corresponding author  

> nagarani.kavin@gmail.com

(N. Brammanayagam);  

> deva@smail.iitm.ac.in

(D. Muniraj) 

> ORCID

(s): 

change over time as the agents form, dissolve, or reorganise into different groups to accomplish their goals. Effective decision-making in these settings requires the agents to con-tinuously perceive, interpret, and anticipate the behaviours of other entities. The ability to understand emerging coor-dination patterns and predict future behaviours is therefore critical for proactive planning, adaptive decision-making, and timely responses to evolving situations. Opponent modelling addresses these challenges by seek-ing to infer the goals, strategies, and future actions of ad-versarial agents from their observed behaviours and inter-actions. It has been extensively studied in domains such as strategic games Liu, Wang, Hu, Hao, Chen and Gao (2020); Ge, Yang, Tian and Chen (2024), robotics Liu, Peters and Alonso-Mora (2023b); Tao, Li, Liang, Shi and Xu (2025), military Huo, Wang and Han (2025); Quer-alta, Taipalmaa, Pullinen, Sarker, Gia, Tenhunen, Gabbouj, Raitoharju and Westerlund (2020) and autonomous sys-tems Hou, Sun, Zhu, Zeng, Piao, Chen and Zhang (2022); Busch, Johnson, Zhu and Borrelli (2022), where under-standing an opponent’s decision-making process enables more effective coordination and strategic planning. Early approaches primarily relied on rule-based reasoning Herik, Donkers and Spronck (2005), probabilistic inference Wei, Lucey, Morgan and Sridharan (2013), and handcrafted be-havioural representations Liu, Cong, Zhao and Zhu (2023a), 

Nagarani et al. Page 1 of 22 arXiv:2607.25316v1 [eess.SY] 28 Jul 2026 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems 

often assuming static environments and predefined oppo-nent models. However, modern multi-agent environments exhibit dynamic interactions and continuously evolving be-haviours, making these assumptions insufficient. In such en-vironments, accurately understanding opponents ultimately requires anticipating their high-level intentions, which fre-quently emerge from coordinated behaviours and evolving interactions among multiple agents rather than from the actions of individual entities in isolation. Therefore, effective opponent modelling requires learning representations that capture both temporal interaction dynamics and the under-lying cooperation structures among the agents. Learning-based approaches have emerged as an effec-tive alternative for modelling complex behaviours in au-tonomous multi-agent systems. Instead of relying on prede-fined rules or handcrafted behavioural representations, these approaches learn meaningful representations directly from observations of agent states, interactions, and trajectories. Recent studies have employed sequential models Du, Lu, Li, Liu and Qiu (2025a); Teng, Song, Wang, Zhang, Wang and lin Zhang (2021), graph-based methods Liu et al. (2020); Yu, Song, Zhang, Liu, Li and Xie (2026), and deep learning tech-niques He and Boyd-Graber (2016); Li, Liang, Li, Yang, Du and Chen (2023) to capture spatial dependencies, temporal evolution, and relational information among multiple agents. By learning from historical observations, these methods can encode rich behavioural representations that reveal latent interaction patterns and provide a compact description of agent dynamics. Reinforcement learning methods Ma, Shen, Zhao, Li, Tong, Zhang and Wang (2021); Huo et al. (2025) focus on learning optimal decision-making policies by en-abling agents to interact with the environment and maximize long-term rewards, thereby addressing how agents should act under varying situations. While these approaches have demonstrated remarkable success in autonomous control and cooperative decision making, they are not well suited to infer latent behavioural intent. In contrast, representation learning Zhang, Yao, Wang, Chang and Liu (2020a); He and Boyd-Graber (2016) approaches aim to learn informative latent representations that capture underlying behavioural patterns, providing descriptive features for various downstream tasks, including behaviour understanding, trajectory prediction, coordination analysis, and intent inference. Among these, collective intent prediction remains challenging because the intent of a team is often not explicitly observable from instantaneous states or short-term behaviours. Instead, it emerges through coordinated multi-agent interactions, re-quiring models that capture dynamic cooperation and long-term temporal dependencies. Although some recent representation learning methods Schneider, Lee and Mathis (2023); Zhang, Guo, Su, Lv and Xu (2023b) have demonstrated the effectiveness of learning latent embeddings and prototype-based representations for behaviour modelling, they do not explicitly capture transfer-able functional roles that emerge from the behavioural char-acteristics of individual agents. Consequently, the learned representations are often tightly coupled to specific agents and scenarios, limiting their ability to generalize across different operational environments. Rather than relying on predefined role labels, it is therefore desirable to learn latent role behaviours from agent-centric behavioral representa-tions, enabling transferable behavioural knowledge across diverse scenarios. Furthermore, multi-agent systems often comprise heterogeneous agents with diverse sensing ca-pabilities, mobility characteristics, functional responsibili-ties, and decision-making strategies. Based on the mission and environment, agents may dynamically assume different functional roles, such as information providers, coordina-tors, decision-makers, or task executors. Although Temporal Graph Networks (TGNs) Rossi, Chamberlain, Frasca, Ey-nard, Monti and Bronstein (2020); Jeon, Zhu, Li, Li, Feng, Duan, Song, Tao and Niu (2025) implicitly encode these co-ordination patterns within spatio-temporal representations, the learned embeddings remain entangled and do not explic-itly expose the latent functional roles of individual agents or their contribution to team-level coordination. Moreover, the node-centric memory mechanism in TGNs primarily preserves scenario-specific interaction histories, making it difficult to capture higher-level behavioral regularities re-quired for reasoning about collective intent in heterogeneous teams. Motivated by these challenges, this paper proposes a Meta-Role Temporal Graph Network (MR-TGN) framework for collective intent prediction in autonomous multi-agent systems. The proposed framework employs TGN to repre-sent agents as dynamically evolving graph entities and con-tinuously update node representations based on temporally ordered interactions. Building upon the rich spatio-temporal representations and node memories learned by TGN, MR-TGN introduces a memory-enhanced role-aware learning module that discovers latent functional roles from agent-centric behavioral dynamics without requiring explicit role annotations. To facilitate knowledge transfer across scenar-ios, the framework maintains a global latent role memory that captures transferable role-related behavioral knowledge and enables the reuse of learned role representations in pre-viously unseen situations. By integrating scenario-specific interaction memories with a global role memory, MR-TGN learns representations that jointly capture temporal interac-tion dynamics, transferable functional roles, and coordinated team behaviours. These enriched representations provide the foundation for role assignment, team formation reasoning, and the inference of high-level collective intent in heteroge-neous multi-agent systems. The main contributions of this work are summarised below: 1. We propose a novel MR-TGN framework for team-level intent prediction in autonomous multi-agent systems. The proposed framework jointly leverages temporally evolv-ing interactions, cooperation structures, and latent role representations to infer shared mission objectives emerg-ing from coordinated behaviours in complex and adver-sarial environments.  

> Nagarani et al. Page 2 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems

2. We introduce a role-aware representation learning mech-anism that captures collective behaviours not only from spatial and temporal interactions among agents but also from the emergence of latent functional roles. The pro-posed approach learns implicit role representations di-rectly from agent behavioural patterns without requiring explicit role annotations, enabling the modelling of evolv-ing behaviours in heterogeneous multi-agent systems. 3. We demonstrate the applicability of the proposed MR-TGN framework through an air combat intent prediction case study involving heterogeneous teams executing di-verse mission objectives. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first application of role-aware temporal graph representation learning for collective intent prediction in autonomous air combat scenarios. 4. We introduce an evaluation methodology for early collec-tive intent prediction that assesses both prediction accu-racy and prediction timeliness. The proposed evaluation provides a realistic measure of a model’s ability to infer collective objectives at early stages of mission execution, thereby supporting proactive decision-making and timely responses in dynamic adversarial environments. 

## 2. Related Work 

Opponent modelling has evolved considerably from early rule-based and probabilistic reasoning frameworks to modern data-driven learning approaches. Early research predominantly adopted rule-based reasoning frameworks Herik et al. (2005), in which expert knowledge and man-ually designed rules were employed to describe opponent strategies and predict future actions. Subsequently, prob-abilistic approaches Wei et al. (2013) emerged to address uncertainty in opponent behaviour by estimating hidden intentions and maintaining belief distributions over possible actions. In parallel, handcrafted behavioural representations Liu et al. (2023a), based on domain-specific features such as movement patterns, tactical formations, and predefined interaction templates, were developed to capture character-istic opponent behaviours. Such assumptions become in-creasingly restrictive in contemporary multi-agent systems, where interactions among agents are inherently dynamic, behaviours continuously evolve in response to changing objectives and environmental conditions, and coordination patterns may reorganise over time. 

2.1. Learning-based Representation Models for Multi-Agent Reasoning 

Recent learning-based intent prediction approaches have increasingly exploited spatio-temporal representations to capture both spatial dependencies and temporal evolution in sequential data. The progression of learning-based ap-proaches for multi-agent reasoning can be viewed as an evolution in the type and complexity of information en-coded by the learned representations. To illustrate this progression, representative models are selected according to their distinct mechanisms for capturing spatial, temporal, and spatio-temporal dependencies which is summarized in Table 1. Graph Attention Network (GAT) is selected as the representative spatial graph model because attention-based GNNs have become a fundamental paradigm for learning topology-aware node representations by adaptively weighting the importance of neighbouring nodes during message passing [Zhang, Jiang, Hu and Song (2020b), Sun, Li, Lin, Zheng, Meng, Rui and Wang (2023)]. Among these models, GAT learns the relative importance of neighbouring agents through attention-based interaction aggregation, but processes each graph state independently without explicitly modelling temporal evolution. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks have been widely adopted for intent recognition because they effectively capture long-term tem-poral dependencies from sequential observations. For exam-ple, an LSTM-based framework combined with adversarial training was proposed to improve intention recognition from RGB video sequences by learning robust temporal representations [Mavsar, Morimoto and Ude (2024)]. But they do not explicitly model relational interactions among multiple agents, limiting their applicability to coordinated multi-agent reasoning. Beyond independent spatial and temporal modelling, spatio-temporal learning approaches jointly capture struc-tural and temporal dependencies. For example, CNN-LSTM and GRU-CNN architectures learn spatial characteristics and temporal dynamics through cascaded convolutional and recurrent modules, demonstrating improved performance in trajectory prediction and intention recognition tasks Du, Lu, Li, Liu and Qiu (2025b); Wang, Yang, Piao, Chai, Huang and Zhou (2024). However, these methods primarily operate on structured sequential signals or individual trajec-tories and do not explicitly represent dynamically evolving inter-agent interactions. To address this limitation, graph-based spatio-temporal models have been proposed. Graph Neural Network GNN-LSTM and Spatio-Temporal Graph Convolution Network (STGCN) are included as represen-tative graph-based spatial-temporal models. Graph Neural Network–Long Short-Term Memory (GNN-LSTM) archi-tectures represent a common approach for spatio-temporal learning by combining graph-based spatial modelling with recurrent temporal learning. For example, a graph-attention LSTM framework represented the traffic network as a graph, employed graph attention to capture spatial dependencies among connected nodes, and utilised LSTM to model tem-poral traffic dynamics [Zhang and Guo (2022); Vitulyova, Babenko, Kolesnikova, Kiktev and Abramkina (2025)]. Such architectures factorize spatial interaction modelling and temporal sequence learning into successive stages, where graph representations are first extracted at each times-tamp and subsequently processed by the recurrent network. Consequently, temporal reasoning operates on already ag-gregated spatial representations rather than directly mod-elling the evolution of pairwise interactions over time. Similarly, Spatio-Temporal Graph Convolutional Networks                                                                                            

> Nagarani et al. Page 3 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems
> Table 1
> Comparison of representative models based on their spatial, temporal, and spatio-temporal modelling capabilities.
> Model Spatial Relations Temporal Dependencies Spatial Attention Temporal Attention Local ST Patterns Long-Term History Persistent Memory Sequential Interaction History Transferable Latent Roles
> GAT [Zhang et al. (2020b); Sun et al. (2023)]
> ✓×✓××××××
> Attention-LSTM [Mavsar et al. (2024)]
> ×✓×✓×✓×××
> GNN-LSTM [Vituly-ova et al. (2025)]
> ✓✓××◦✓×◦×
> Graph Attention LSTM [Zhang and Guo (2022)]
> ✓✓✓×◦✓×◦×
> STGCN [Luo et al. (2024); Siabi et al. (2026)]
> ✓✓××✓◦×◦×
> DySAT [Sankar, Wu, Gou, Zhang and Yang (2020)]
> ✓✓✓✓✓✓×◦×
> TGN [Rossi et al. (2020); Jeon et al. (2025)]
> ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓×
> MR-TGN (Proposed) ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> ✓: explicitly supported; ◦: partially or indirectly supported; ×: not explicitly supported.

(STGCNs) jointly apply graph convolution and tempo-ral convolution to learn spatial dependencies and tempo-ral dynamics from graph-structured data [Luo, Li and Qi (2024); Siabi, Son, Thomas, Irrgang and Saynisch-Wagner (2026)]. Their effectiveness has been demonstrated in ap-plications such as terrorism risk forecasting, where mul-tiple graph structures were combined with temporal mod-elling to capture complex spatio-temporal correlations Luo et al. (2024). Nevertheless, STGCNs primarily capture local spatio-temporal patterns, and their fixed temporal receptive field limits the modelling of long-range historical dependen-cies and irregularly evolving coordination behaviours. To address these limitations, recent studies have increas-ingly adopted dynamic graph-based learning frameworks, in which agents are represented as nodes and their interactions are modelled as time-evolving graphs, enabling the learning of relational dependencies that govern collective behav-iors and intents. Among these approaches, Dynamic Self-Attention Network (DySAT) Sankar et al. (2020)] and TGN [Rossi et al. (2020); Jeon et al. (2025)]] are selected as repre-sentative dynamic graph representation learning models be-cause they explicitly learn evolving spatio-temporal depen-dencies while maintaining expressive node representations for downstream reasoning tasks. Dynamic Self-Attention Network (DySAT) further introduces hierarchical attention by applying structural attention within individual graph snapshots and temporal self-attention across the sequence of node representations, enabling the model to identify both influential interactions and informative historical graph states. Nevertheless, temporal reasoning is performed over sequences of snapshot-level representations and does not maintain an explicit persistent state that is incrementally updated as new interactions are observed. TGN [[Rossi et al. (2020); Jeon et al. (2025)]] addresses this limitation through node-wise memory that sequentially accumulates historical interaction information and combines the resulting memory states with temporal graph aggregation, making it suitable for modelling continuously evolving multi-agent interactions. However, the learned memory remains agent-specific and does not explicitly identify recurring func-tional behaviours or transfer shared role knowledge across agents and scenarios. Motivated by these complementary modelling capabilities and limitations, the proposed MR-TGN framework extends memory-based temporal graph learning with globally shared meta-role representations that capture recurring within-agent behavioural dynamics. By integrating evolving interaction information, persistent temporal memory, and transferable latent role knowledge, MR-TGN learns richer representations for team discovery and collective intent prediction across heterogeneous multi-agent systems. Air combat provides a challenging case study for multi-agent intent prediction due to its highly dynamic, adver-sarial, and heterogeneous operational environment, where multiple agents with different capabilities and functional  

> Nagarani et al. Page 4 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems

responsibilities interact and coordinate over time to accom-plish mission objectives. Accurate prediction of opponent intent in such environments requires reasoning from the observed behaviours and interactions of multiple aircraft whose trajectories and coordination patterns continuously evolve during mission execution. Consequently, various studies have investigated air combat intent prediction using trajectory-based analysis, probabilistic reasoning, deep se-quential models, and interaction-aware learning approaches. Deep learning-based air combat intent prediction has been explored using recurrent architectures such as GRU Teng et al. (2021); Xia, Chen and Fang (2023) and BiLSTM Wang et al. (2024) to capture the temporal evolution of combat behaviours, while ANN-based frameworks Wang, Wang, Li and Wang (2025) have also been developed for attack intent recognition in swarm engagement scenarios. To enhance temporal feature learning, hybrid 1D CNN–BiLSTM archi-tectures Zhang, Zhou, Li, Liang, Song and Yuan (2023a) have been developed to jointly capture local temporal pat-terns and long-range sequential dependencies for air combat intention recognition. GNN-based relationship reasoning has been employed to capture complex inter-agent rela-tionships for collaborative decision-making in large-scale air combat Piao, Han, Chen, Peng, Fan, Sun, Liang, Liu, Sun and Zhou (2023). Large-scale autonomous air com-bat has been modelled as a dynamic graph using multi-agent reinforcement learning, where automatic sub-team partitioning and message passing are employed to manage complex inter-agent relationships and support collaborative decision-making Fan, Piao, Hu, Jiang and Yang (2024). Collectively, these studies highlight the increasing use of deep learning and graph-based approaches for air combat intent recognition and collaborative decision-making. 

2.2. Collective Intent Prediction in Heterogeneous Multi-Agent Systems 

Although dynamic graph learning methods have sig-nificantly improved the modelling of evolving interactions, most existing intent prediction approaches infer intentions at the individual-agent level or directly classify mission intent from aggregated behavioural representations without explicitly reasoning about team formation. Consequently, they overlook the intermediate process through which co-ordinated groups emerge, limiting their ability to capture collective behaviours that arise from team organization and inter-agent cooperation. In contrast, our framework explic-itly performs team assignment prior to collective intent prediction, enabling intent reasoning to be grounded in dy-namically inferred team structures rather than isolated agent behaviours. Another important limitation is that existing studies rarely address collective intent reasoning in heterogeneous multi-agent teams, where agents possess distinct capabil-ities, responsibilities, and interaction behaviours. Existing studies on heterogeneous multi-agent systems have pri-marily focused on trajectory prediction by modelling how different categories of agents interact and influence one another. For instance, methods such as BIP-Tree employ interaction mechanisms that account for distinct behavioural perceptions and responses among heterogeneous agents and leverage high-order message passing to improve future trajectory forecasting Zhang et al. (2023b). Despite these advances, the learned interactions and semantic representa-tions are predominantly exploited to predict future motions rather than to reason about shared objectives emerging from coordinated behaviours. Consequently, the problem of inferring collective intent in heterogeneous teams remains largely underexplored. To address these challenges, we propose a generic team-aware intent prediction framework based on MR-TGN and a sequential multi-task learning (MTL) paradigm. The MR-TGN encoder jointly models spatial coordination, temporal coordination, historical dependencies, and temporally syn-chronized interactions to learn coordination-aware represen-tations of interacting agents. To further abstract these inter-action patterns, the framework incorporates globally shared latent role memories that discover transferable functional be-haviours directly from behavioral dynamics without requir-ing explicit role annotations. The resulting representations are subsequently exploited within a sequential multi-task decoder that first infers team structures and then predicts col-lective intent at the team level. Owing to its generic formula-tion, the proposed framework is applicable to a broad class of multi-agent systems involving coordinated behaviours and collective decision making. In this work, we employ air combat as a representative and challenging case study to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework. 

## 3. Problem Formulation 

Consider a dynamic multi-agent environment consisting of a set of agents  = 𝑣 1, 𝑣 2, … , 𝑣 𝑁 whose states and interactions evolve over time. The agents may exhibit het-erogeneous motion characteristics, interaction patterns, and functional behaviours while coordinating to accomplish a common collective objective. Given the observed trajecto-ries and interactions of the agents over a temporal obser-vation window, the objective of this work is to identify the underlying team structure and predict the collective intent exhibited by the interacting agents. 

3.1. Dynamic Graph Representation 

The evolving multi-agent system is represented as a sequence of temporal interaction graphs, expressed as 

1∶ 𝑇 = {1, 2, … , 𝑇 } . (1) where the interaction graph at time 𝑡 is defined as 

𝑡 = (𝑡 , 𝑡 , 𝐗 𝑡 , 𝐅 𝑡 ) . (2) Here, 𝑡 and 𝑡 denote the set of agents observed at time 

𝑡 and the set of pairwise interactions among the observed agents, respectively. At each time step, the interaction graph is constructed as a fully connected graph, such that an edge 

𝑒 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 ∈ 𝑡 exists between every pair of distinct agents 𝑣 𝑖 and  

> Nagarani et al. Page 5 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems

𝑣 𝑗 . Since the true coordination structure is unknown a priori, we construct a fully connected candidate interaction graph among all active agents to avoid prematurely discarding potentially meaningful interactions through heuristic edge pruning. The active node set changes with agent entry and departure, inducing corresponding topology changes. Each agent 𝑣 𝑖 is associated with a node feature vector 𝐱 𝑡 𝑖 ∈

ℝ𝑑 𝑛 , which characterizes the instantaneous motion state and observable attributes of the agent, while each edge 𝑒 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 is as-sociated with an edge feature vector 𝐟 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 which represents the relative spatial and motion characteristics of agent 𝑣 𝑗 with respect to agent 𝑣 𝑖 at time 𝑡 . As agents might enter or leave the observed environment over time, 𝑡 and consequently, the corresponding edge set 𝑡 might change. Thus, the graph topology dynamically evolves with the composition of the observed agent set, while maintaining full connectivity among all agents present at each time step. In addition, the time-varying node and edge features characterize the evolving states and pairwise relationships of the agents. Their evolution over time provides important information regarding changes in proximity, motion alignment, relative orientation, and coordinated movement patterns. The tem-poral observation history up to time 𝑡 is denoted as 𝑡 ={1, 2, … , 𝑡 }. Given 𝑡 , the proposed framework jointly addresses two related learning objectives: team assignment and collective intent prediction. 

## 4. Methodology 

The overall architecture of the proposed framework is illustrated in Fig. 1. The input comprises multi-agent spatio-temporal trajectories containing kinematic and interaction features and relative motion information between interacting agents. These observations are represented as an evolving interaction graph, where nodes correspond to agents and edges encode their dynamic relationships over time. The proposed framework consists of two major components: (i) a MR-TGN encoder and (ii) a sequential MTL decoder. The MR-TGN encoder learns coordination-aware node represen-tations by jointly modelling spatial coordination, temporal coordination, historical dependencies, and temporally syn-chronized/ sequenced interactions among agents. To fur-ther abstract these interaction patterns, the encoder incorpo-rates a global latent role memory that discovers transferable functional roles from behavioural dynamics and enriches the node representations with role semantics. The sequen-tial MTL decoder exploits these learned representations to reason about collective behaviour at multiple levels. First, coordination-aware node embeddings are utilized to infer team assignments by identifying groups of agents exhibiting coherent interaction patterns. Subsequently, the role-aware embeddings together with the inferred team structures are aggregated to predict a single collective intent for each team. By explicitly integrating coordination modelling, latent role discovery, and hierarchical reasoning over teams and intents, the proposed framework provides a unified approach for team-aware intent prediction in complex multi-agent envi-ronments. 

4.1. MR-TGN Encoder 

The proposed MR-TGN encoder is designed to learn agent representations that jointly capture the evolving co-ordination patterns and latent functional roles of agents in dynamic multi-agent environments. Given a sequence of time-evolving interaction graphs, the encoder first employs a TGN to model the spatial and temporal evolution of agent interactions. The resulting coordination-aware node repre-sentations are subsequently integrated with behavior-derived latent role representations, enabling the model to incorporate functional role information into the learned agent repre-sentations. Consequently, the MR-TGN encoder transforms the observed spatio-temporal interaction history, together with the inferred behavioral role information, into role-aware agent representations that provide a structured representa-tion of the evolving multi-agent system for the downstream prediction tasks. 

4.1.1. TGN for Coordination Representation Learning 

At each time step, the multi-agent system is represented as an evolving interaction graph. Since the interaction struc-ture and motion states continuously evolve over time, analyz-ing individual graph snapshots independently is insufficient to capture the coordination dynamics underlying collective agent behavior. Therefore, the TGN component learns agent representations by integrating information from the current interaction structure with the temporally accumulated inter-action history. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the TGN component is designed to capture four complementary aspects of coor-dination dynamics: spatial coordination, temporal coordina-tion, historical dependencies, and temporally synchronized or sequenced interactions. Spatial coordination characterizes the instantaneous re-lationships among agents at a particular time step. Through neighborhood message passing over the interaction graph, each agent aggregates information from its interacting neigh-bors and their pairwise edge features. This enables the en-coder to represent local interaction structures such as relative proximity, motion compatibility, convergence or divergence, and other spatial dependencies that characterize coordinated behavior. Temporal coordination captures the evolution of agent states and interactions across consecutive time steps. Changes in motion states, neighborhood configurations, and pairwise interaction characteristics provide important evidence regarding how coordination patterns develop over time. By processing timestamped interactions and updating agent representations as new observations become available, the TGN models the temporal evolution of individual and collective behaviors. Historical dependencies represent the influence of past interactions on the current behavior of an agent. In dynamic multi-agent environments, the current state of an agent may depend not only on its immediate interactions but also on previously observed coordination patterns. The memory mechanism of the TGN maintains and updates agent-specific    

> Nagarani et al. Page 6 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems
> Figure 1: Overall architecture of the proposed framework.
> Figure 2: Overall architecture of the proposed MR-TGN encoder.

historical information based on incoming temporal inter-actions, thereby enabling the current node representation to incorporate relevant information accumulated from ear-lier observations. Temporally synchronized or sequenced interactions capture dependencies arising from the relative timing and ordering of interactions among multiple agents. Coordinated behavior may emerge when different agents perform related actions simultaneously or according to a particular temporal sequence. Such dependencies cannot be fully represented by considering only individual temporal trajectories or isolated graph snapshots. By processing tem-porally ordered interactions and integrating them with the historical memory states of interacting agents, the TGN learns representations that reflect both synchronized and sequential patterns of multi-agent coordination. The learned representation 𝐳 𝑡 𝑖 summarizes the current motion state of agent 𝑖 , its interactions with neighboring agents, relevant historical information, and the temporal evolution of its coordination relationships. The TGN module processes time-stamped agent inter-actions in temporal mini-batches. For each batch associated with time 𝑡 , the module follows a strictly causal workflow: (i) update node memories using messages generated in previous batches, (ii) compute temporal node embeddings by jointly leveraging the updated node memories together with the current batch’s node features and edge attributes, and (iii) generate raw messages from the current batch interactions for use in subsequent batches.  

> Nagarani et al. Page 7 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems

Memory update using past interactions 

Before processing interactions at time 𝑡 , each node re-trieves its historical interaction information from the Raw Message Store (RMS). The RMS stores raw messages gen-erated by interactions at earlier timestamps that have not yet been incorporated into the node memory. Let 𝑚 𝑢 →𝑖 (𝜏 ) denote a raw message generated by an interaction between nodes 

𝑢 and 𝑖 at timestamp 𝜏 . During batch processing, a node may receive multiple messages originating from different interactions. To handle this, all raw messages generated for node 𝑖 at timestamps strictly earlier than the current batch time 𝑡 are aggregated as ̄𝑚 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = AGG {𝑚 𝑢 →𝑖 (𝜏 ) || 𝜏 < 𝑡 } , (3) where 𝑖 and 𝑢 denote node indices, 𝜏 represents the times-tamp at which the interaction occurred, and AGG( ⋅) is a permutation-invariant batch-level aggregation operator. Herein, AGG( ⋅) is instantiated as the mean operator that summarizes the set of historical messages by averaging all messages received by 𝑖 prior to time 𝑡 .After aggregating past interaction messages, the memory of node 𝑖 is updated using a gated recurrent unit (GRU) as 

𝑠 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = GRU (̄𝑚 𝑖 (𝑡 ), 𝑠 𝑖 (𝑡 −)) , (4) where 𝑠 𝑖 (𝑡 −) denotes the pre-interaction memory state, and ̄𝑚 𝑖 (𝑡 ) represents the aggregated messages derived from past interactions. This update is performed only for nodes that participate in at least one interaction event within the batch; the memory states of all other nodes remain unchanged. The GRU gating mechanism enables selective retention and for-getting of past information, allowing the memory to capture long-term interaction dependencies while remaining respon-sive to recent behavioral patterns. This causality-preserving memory update forms the foundation for subsequent node embedding computation and attention-based neighbor ag-gregation in the proposed framework. 

Multi-head temporal attention 

After updating the node memories, the encoder com-putes a context-aware temporal representation for each agent. This representation integrates three complementary sources of information: (i) the historical interaction context retained in the node memory, (ii) the agent’s current be-havioral state, and (iii) the current pairwise relationships with neighboring agents. The first two sources are com-bined to form the node representation, while the relational information is incorporated during the subsequent attention computation. Specifically, the context representation of node 

𝑖 is defined as 

𝐜 𝑡 𝑖 = [𝐬 𝑡 − 

> 𝑖

‖ 𝐱 𝑡 𝑖 

] (5) where 𝐬 𝑡 − 

> 𝑖

denotes the memory state of node 𝑖 immediately before time 𝑡 , and 𝐱 𝑡 𝑖 represents its current node features. To incorporate the heterogeneous relational information be-tween agents, the edge feature vector 𝐞 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 is transformed into a learned edge representation as 

𝐠 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 = 𝑓 𝑒 

(

𝐞 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 

)

(6) where 𝑓 𝑒 (⋅) denotes a learnable edge-encoding function. The query representation is derived only from the current agent because it reflects the information required to update its representation. In contrast, the key and value represen-tations additionally incorporate the pairwise edge features, allowing the attention mechanism to evaluate neighboring agents based on both their individual states and their current relationships with the current agent. Accordingly, for each attention head 𝑘 , the query ( 𝐪 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

), key ( 𝐤 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖𝑗

), and value ( 𝐯 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖𝑗

)representations are computed as 

𝐪 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

= 𝐖 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑄

𝐜 𝑡 𝑖 (Query) ,

𝐤 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖𝑗

= 𝐖 (𝑘 )

> 𝐾

[

𝐜 𝑡 𝑗 ‖ 𝐠 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 

]

(Key) ,

𝐯 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖𝑗

= 𝐖 (𝑘 )

> 𝑉

[

𝐜 𝑡 𝑗 ‖ 𝐠 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 

]

(Value) . (7) where 𝐖 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑄

, 𝐖 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐾

, and 𝐖 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑉

are the learnable projection matrices for the 𝑘 -th attention head that transform the node context vector and the concatenated node-edge representa-tion into the query, key, and value spaces, respectively. For each attention head, the encoder estimates the relevance of every neighboring agent to the current agent by comparing the query with the edge-aware key representations of its neighbors. The resulting attention coefficients determine how strongly information from each neighboring agent con-tributes to the updated temporal representation. By condi-tioning the key and value representations on the learned edge embeddings, the attention mechanism learns coordination patterns that emerge from spatial relationships, temporal evolution, historical memory, and synchronized interactions among heterogeneous agents. Consequently, agents that ex-hibit stronger coordination receive higher attention weights regardless of their individual roles or feature similarity. The unnormalized attention score between node 𝑖 and neighbor 𝑗 for attention head 𝑘 is then computed using scaled dot-product attention as 

𝜓 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖𝑗

(𝑡 ) = 

(

𝐪 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

(𝑡 )

)⊤

𝐤 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖𝑗

(𝑡 )

√𝑑 𝑘 

, (8) where 𝑑 𝑘 denotes the dimensionality of the query and key representations. Unlike an attention mechanism based on predefined trajectory similarity or pairwise interaction re-cency, the proposed formulation learns the relative impor-tance of neighboring agents directly from their historical memory states, current behavioral features, and pairwise re-lational context. This formulation is particularly suitable for heterogeneous multi-agent teams, where coordinated agents may exhibit dissimilar motion patterns due to their distinct functional behaviors. Conditioning the attention mechanism on the complete edge representation allows MR-TGN to  

> Nagarani et al. Page 8 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems

identify informative interactions without imposing an ex-plicit assumption that behaviorally similar agents should receive higher attention weights. The normalized attention weights are computed as 

𝛼 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖𝑗

(𝑡 ) = exp (𝜓 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖𝑗

(𝑡 ))∑ 

> 𝑢 ∈(𝑖,𝑡 )

exp (𝜓 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖𝑢

(𝑡 )) . (9) Each attention head computes a self-aware temporal em-bedding by combining a coordination-aware aggregation of neighboring nodes with a query derived from the node’s own memory and current state features as given by 

𝐳 t 

> 𝑖, (𝑘 )

= ∑ 

> 𝑗 ∈(𝑖,𝑡 )

𝛼 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖𝑗

(𝑡 ) 𝐯 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖𝑗

(𝑡 ) + 𝐪 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

(𝑡 ). (10) The final temporal embedding is given by the concatenation of all heads as 

𝐳 t 

> 𝑖

= ‖‖‖

> 𝐾 𝑘 =1

𝐳 t

> 𝑖, (𝑘 )

. (11) 

Raw message computation for future memory updates 

After computing 𝑧 t

> 𝑖

, the model encodes the interaction ob-served at time 𝑡 into a raw message that will influence future timestamps. The message for interaction (𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑡 ) is computed as 

𝑚 𝑖 →𝑗 (𝑡 ) = MLP 𝑚 

(𝑧 𝑖 (𝑡 −), 𝑧 𝑗 (𝑡 −), 𝑒 𝑖𝑗 (𝑡 )) (12) This message is stored in the RMS and is used when updating the memory for future interactions. No memory update is performed at time 𝑡 , thereby preserving strict temporal causality. 

4.1.2. Global Meta-Role Module 

Although the TGN captures how agents interact and how coordination relationships evolve over time, agents ex-hibiting similar behavioural dynamics may perform similar functional roles within the multi-agent system. Such roles are generally not directly observable and may recur across different teams, scenarios, and interaction configurations. For example, in an air combat scenario, agents exhibiting similar behavioural dynamics may consistently assume func-tional roles such as escort, penetrator, flanker, decoy, or reconnaissance, regardless of their identities or the specific mission. Although these roles are not explicitly provided during training, they can emerge naturally from the learned behavioural representations. To capture this higher-level behavioural regularity, the proposed encoder introduces a behaviour-guided meta-role module that first constructs an agent-centric behavioural reference from recent temporal dynamics and subsequently uses it to extract behaviour-relevant information from the context-rich TGN embeddings for latent role discovery. The meta-role module consists of three conceptual stages: agent-centric behaviour representa-tion learning, global role prototype modelling, and soft role assignment. The resulting role representations are optimized jointly with the downstream team assignment and intent prediction objectives, enabling the global role memory to capture transferable latent behavioral patterns that support collective intent reasoning across different scenarios. 

Agent-centric Behaviour Representation Learning 

The TGN encoder produces context-rich node embed-dings 𝐳 𝑡 𝑖 that jointly capture individual motion characteris-tics, inter-agent interactions. While these representations are effective for modeling collective behavior, directly using the complete node embeddings for role discovery may cause the learned role representations to be influenced predominantly by interaction or team-specific coordination patterns. In con-trast, latent roles are expected to reflect recurring behavioral characteristics of individual agents while retaining the task-relevant contextual information learned by the temporal graph encoder. To provide an explicit agent-centric behavioral refer-ence, a behavioral representation is constructed from the recent temporal evolution of the node features. Specifically, let 𝐗 𝑡 𝑖, beh =

[

𝐱 𝑡 −𝐿 𝑖, beh , … , 𝐱 𝑡 𝑖, beh 

]

. The representation 𝐗 𝑡 𝑖, beh 

denotes a short temporal window of behavior-related node features for agent 𝑖 , where 𝐿 determines the behavioral observation horizon. The behavioral feature vector 𝐱 𝑡 𝑖, beh 

contains attributes that characterize the agent’s intrinsic state evolution and individual behavioral dynamics, while ex-cluding explicit relational information derived from neigh-boring agents or pairwise interactions. Depending on the application domain, these features may represent motion characteristics, state transitions, action patterns, or other agent-specific temporal attributes. The specific behavioral node features used in the air combat case study are described in Section 5. Rather than directly using these node-feature dynamics for role retrieval, we first summarize the recent behavioral dynamics into a compact behavioral descriptor. Specifically, temporal variations in the behavior-related node features are aggregated through mean pooling to capture the agent’s re-cent behavioral evolution as 𝐝 𝑡 𝑖, beh = Pool 

(

Δ𝐗 𝑡 𝑖, beh 

)

, where 

Pool( ⋅) denotes mean pooling over the temporal dimension. The resulting behavioral descriptor is then mapped by a lightweight projection network 𝜙 beh (⋅) into a latent behav-ioral reference space as 𝐡 𝑡 𝑖, beh = 𝜙 beh 

(

𝐝 𝑡 𝑖, beh 

)

. The result-ing behavioral reference representation provides an agent-centric description of recent behavioral dynamics and is used to guide the extraction of behavior-relevant information from the context-rich TGN embedding. Accordingly, a behavior-conditioned projection is intro-duced as 𝐠 𝑡 𝑖 = 𝜎 

(

𝐖 𝑏 𝐡 𝑡 𝑖, beh + 𝐛 𝑏 

)

, followed by 

𝐛 𝑡 𝑖 = 𝐳 𝑡 𝑖 ⊙ 𝐠 𝑡 𝑖 (13) where 𝜎 (⋅) denotes the sigmoid activation function and the operator ⊙ represents element-wise multiplication. 𝐠 𝑡 𝑖 acts as a behavior-conditioned feature gate that selectively empha-sizes the dimensions of the context-rich temporal embedding  

> Nagarani et al. Page 9 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems

𝐳 𝑡 𝑖 that are relevant to the agent’s recent behavioral dynamics. Consequently, 𝐛 𝑡 𝑖 biases the context-rich TGN embedding toward agent-centric behavioral characteristics relevant to role discovery. 

Global role prototype modelling 

Next, the behaviour guided representations in (13) are compared with a set of learnable global role prototypes to discover latent functional roles. Agents exhibiting similar behavioural patterns occupy nearby regions of the learned representation space. Consequently, recurring patterns in the representations can reveal underlying functional similarities among agents without requiring explicit role annotations. To represent these recurring behavioral patterns, the proposed framework maintains a set of 𝐾 learnable global role proto-types, given by 

 = {𝐫 1, 𝐫 2, … , 𝐫 𝐾 

} , 𝐫 𝑘 ∈ ℝ𝑑 𝑟 (14) where each prototype represents a latent functional role that captures recurring behavioural patterns shared across agents and training scenarios. The role prototypes are model param-eters learned jointly with the remaining network components through end-to-end optimization. Unlike scenario-specific role representations, the global prototypes provide a shared latent role space in which recurring behavioural patterns can be captured across different scenario configurations and team compositions. 

Soft role assignment 

For each agent, the behavior-conditioned representation is compared with the global role prototypes to determine its association with the latent roles. Rather than assigning an agent to a single role using a discrete decision, the proposed method employs a soft matching mechanism. The role-assignment probability of agent 𝑣 𝑖 to the 𝑘 𝑡ℎ role prototype is expressed as 

𝛼 𝑡 𝑖𝑘 = exp (sim (𝐛 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝐫 𝑘 

) ∕𝜏 )

> 𝐾

∑

> 𝑙 =1

exp (sim (𝐛 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝐫 𝑙 

) ∕𝜏 )

(15) where sim( ⋅, ⋅) denotes the similarity function and 𝜏 is a temperature parameter controlling the sharpness of the role assignments. The resulting role-assignment vector 

𝜶 𝑡 𝑖 = [𝛼 𝑡 𝑖 1, … , 𝛼 𝑡 𝑖𝐾 

] (16) represents the degree to which the behavioral dynamics of an agent is associated with each latent role. The role representation of an agent is subsequently ob-tained as the weighted combination of the global role proto-types as ̃

𝐫 𝑡 𝑖 =

> 𝐾

∑

> 𝑘 =1

𝛼 𝑡 𝑖𝑘 𝐫 𝑘 (17) This soft role representation allows an agent to exhibit char-acteristics associated with multiple latent roles and provides a differentiable mechanism for jointly learning the global role prototypes and the remaining model components. Finally, the coordination-aware temporal representation and the inferred role representation are integrated to obtain the role-enhanced agent representation: 

𝐡 𝑡 𝑖 = Fuse (𝐳 𝑡 𝑖 ,̃ 𝐫 𝑡 𝑖 

) , (18) where Fuse( ⋅, ⋅) denotes the feature fusion operation em-ployed by the proposed framework. The resulting represen-tation preserves the spatial, temporal, and historical coordi-nation information captured by the TGN while incorporating higher-level information regarding the latent behavioral role exhibited by the agent. The resulting role-enhanced rep-resentations are provided to the downstream task-specific decoders, whose learning objectives jointly optimize the MR-TGN encoder and the global role prototypes through end-to-end training. 

4.2. Sequential Multi-Task Decoder 

The decoder is designed to progressively transform the role-enhanced agent representations produced by the MR-TGN encoder into team-level collective intent predictions. As illustrated in Fig. 3, the decoder consists of two sequential task-specific stages: team assignment and collective intent prediction . The first stage identifies the latent team structure among interacting agents, while the second stage exploits the inferred team composition to construct team-level rep-resentations and predict the collective intent of each team. Although the two tasks are performed sequentially in the forward computation, the entire framework is trained jointly in an end-to-end manner, allowing the downstream learning objectives to optimize the MR-TGN encoder, global role prototypes, and task-specific decoder components. 

Step 1: Team Assignment 

Given the behavioral agent representations 𝐳 𝑡 𝑖 produced by the Temporal Graph Network, the team assignment mod-ule estimates the associations among agents based on their learned spatio-temporal interaction representations. The ob-jective of this stage is to identify groups of agents exhibiting compatible role, behavioral, and coordination characteristics without assuming a fixed team composition. Accordingly, the team assignment module produces a predicted partition of the agents into 𝑀 𝑡 teams as 𝑡 =

{

𝑡 

> 1

, 𝑡 

> 2

, … , 𝑡 𝑀 𝑡 

}

,where 𝑡 𝑚 denotes the set of agents assigned to the 𝑚 𝑡ℎ team at time 𝑡 , and 𝑀 𝑡 denotes the number of inferred teams. Since the team structure is derived from the learned agent representations, the framework can accommodate variations in team composition and interaction configurations across different scenarios. 

Step 2: Collective Intent Prediction 

The inferred team assignments are subsequently used to construct team-level representations for collective intent prediction. For each inferred team 𝑡 𝑚 , the role-enhanced representations of its constituent agents are aggregated using   

> Nagarani et al. Page 10 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems
> Figure 3: Overall architecture of the proposed sequential multi-task Decoder.

a permutation-invariant pooling operation: 

𝐮 𝑡 𝑚 = Pool ({ 𝐡 𝑡 𝑖 ∣ 𝑖 ∈ 𝑡 𝑚 

}) , (19) where Pool( ⋅) denotes the team-level aggregation oper-ation and 𝐮 𝑡 𝑚 represents the resulting team embedding. The pooling operation enables the construction of a fixed-dimensional team representation independent of the number and ordering of agents within the team. The resulting team representation is provided to the team intent prediction head, which estimates the probability distribution over the possible collective intent classes: ̂

𝐲 𝑡 𝑚 = sof tmax (𝑓 intent 

(𝐮 𝑡 𝑚 

)) , (20) where 𝑓 intent (⋅) denotes the learnable team intent prediction head and ̂ 𝐲 𝑡 𝑚 denotes the predicted collective intent distri-bution of the 𝑚 𝑡ℎ team. The final output of the decoder is a set of team-level collective intent predictions given by ̂

𝑡 =

{̂

𝐲 𝑡 

> 1

,̂ 𝐲 𝑡 

> 2

, … ,̂ 𝐲 𝑡 𝑀 𝑡 

}

, where each prediction corresponds to one of the teams identified by the team assignment stage. By explicitly performing team structure discovery before collective intent prediction, the proposed decoder enables team-aware reasoning over dynamic multi-agent systems and avoids directly inferring collective behaviors from an undifferentiated set of interacting agents. 

Effect of Role Granularity on Early Situation Understanding 

The number of role prototypes determines the granular-ity of latent coordination patterns captured by the shared role memory. A small number of prototypes limits role diversity and causes different behaviors to be merged, whereas an excessive number of prototypes leads to fragmented repre-sentations and reduced generalization. Moderate values of 

𝐾 provide an appropriate balance between representational capacity and robustness, resulting in improved collective intent discrimination, early correct recognition, and faster prediction stabilization. Experimental results indicate that moderate values of 𝐾 provide the best trade-off between representational capacity and robustness, leading to early and more stable intent recognition. A detailed sensitivity analysis of the effect of K is presented in Section 5.2.4 

## 5. Case Study 

The proposed framework is evaluated through a case study involving dynamic multi-agent interactions, with the objective of assessing its ability to discover evolving team structures and predict team-level collective intents. Air com-bat is considered for the case study due to its highly dy-namic interaction patterns, heterogeneous agent behaviors, evolving team compositions, and coordinated mission ex-ecution. These characteristics provide a challenging multi-agent environment for evaluating the capability of the pro-posed framework to learn temporal coordination patterns, discover latent behavioral roles, identify team structures, and predict collective intents. Accordingly, diverse air combat scenarios are simulated to generate temporal interaction data containing agent-level state evolution and pairwise coordi-nation information. The proposed framework is trained and evaluated on the resulting dataset to analyze its performance in team assignment and collective intent prediction. The remainder of this section first describes the dataset gener-ation procedure, followed by the experimental results and discussion. 

5.1. Dataset Generation 

Existing publicly available multi-agent datasets are pri-marily designed for tasks such as trajectory prediction, in-teraction modeling, or individual behavior analysis, and  

> Nagarani et al. Page 11 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems

therefore do not provide the annotations and scenario di-versity required for collective intent prediction in heteroge-neous teams. In particular, they typically lack explicit team-level intent labels, dynamic team compositions, mission-specific coordination patterns, and latent role transitions that are essential for evaluating the proposed framework. Consequently, a dedicated dataset was generated to provide complete control over mission design, agent behaviors, role assignments, and intent annotations while ensuring the avail-ability of synchronized temporal interaction data required for training and evaluation. The generated dataset has been made publicly available through the Heterogeneous-Team-Intent-Dataset GitHub repository. The air combat scenarios are generated using SCRIM-MAGE, which stands for Simulating Collaborative Robots in Massive Multi-Agent Game Execution, a modular simu-lation framework designed for the development and evalua-tion of autonomous multi-agent systems DeMarco, Squires, Day and Pippin (2019). SCRIMMAGE supports the simula-tion of multiple interacting agents with configurable motion models, behaviors, and mission-level logic within a common simulation environment. Its modular architecture enables the construction of diverse multi-agent scenarios and the systematic generation of time-varying agent trajectories and state information. In this study, SCRIMMAGE is employed to construct air combat scenarios with varying mission com-positions, agent roles, and behavioral evolution. Mission-specific behaviors and phase transitions Zhao, Lu, Wang, Liu, Ding and Wang (2025) are implemented to gener-ate heterogeneous and homogeneous multi-agent interaction patterns corresponding to the considered collective intents. During each simulation run, the time-varying states of all aircraft are recorded and subsequently processed to construct temporal interaction graphs for training and evaluating the proposed framework. The use of a common simulation envi-ronment enables controlled generation of diverse scenarios while systematically varying team compositions and mission configurations. The simulation environment comprises multiple aircraft exhibiting either heterogeneous or homogeneous motion characteristics, temporally evolving behaviors, and coordi-nated mission execution. This case study is designed to evaluate the proposed framework’s ability to identify dy-namically formed teams and infer their collective intents from spatio-temporal interaction patterns. The simulation considers five collective intent labels: Sky Sentinel Strike (SSS), Escort Penetration Strike (EPS), Anti-Ship Strike (ASS), Reconnaissance (Recon), and No Mission (NM). The first four intent labels correspond to coordinated mission behaviors, whereas the NM label represents aircraft that do not exhibit the characteristic behavioral and coordina-tion patterns associated with any of the modeled missions. Importantly, individual simulation scenarios do not nec-essarily contain all mission types simultaneously. Instead, the generated scenarios consist of different combinations of aircraft assigned to one or more missions and aircraft not engaged in any mission, producing variations in the number of teams, team compositions, agent behaviors, and interaction configurations. The four coordinated missions are designed to capture different forms of collective behavior. SSS, EPS, and ASS consist of heterogeneous agents exhibiting distinct motion characteristics according to their functional roles within the team. In contrast, the Recon mission consists of homoge-neous agents that initially exhibit similar behavioral charac-teristics and collectively transition through different phases of mission execution. Inspired by recent studies that model UAV swarm operations as multi-stage collaborative tasks with distinct objectives across mission phases, our missions are also organized into sequential operational phases that represent the evolution of team behavior during mission execution Zhao et al. (2025). This combination of hetero-geneous and homogeneous teams provides a challenging evaluation setting, since team identification and intent pre-diction cannot rely solely on similarities in individual agent trajectories. The five collective intents are briefly described below. 

Sky Sentinel Strike (SSS) 

The SSS mission consists of four agents with distinct behavioral roles: a striker, a left flanker, a right flanker, and a decoy. The mission is inspired by coordinated unmanned combat aerial vehicles (UCAV) air combat strategies, where multiple aircraft cooperate through role-dependent tactical coordination to accomplish a common engagement objective Liu, Ding, Tan, Luo, Li and Zhou (2025).During the initial phase, the agents move toward the operational region while maintaining coordination as a team. In the second phase, the agents begin to exhibit role-dependent motion charac-teristics. The striker proceeds along the primary approach direction, while the left and right flankers deviate toward different sides of the operational region. The decoy follows a distinct maneuver pattern intended to create behavioral separation from the primary attacking agent. During the final phase, the agents execute their respective engagement behaviors. The striker proceeds toward the target and, upon reaching the Weapon Engagement Zone (WEZ), initiates weapon engagement. Meanwhile, the left and right flankers maintain their respective approach directions and engage the target from spatially separated positions, while the decoy continues its distinct maneuver pattern. This phase therefore exhibits simultaneous role-dependent engagement behaviors associated with the same collective mission. Consequently, the SSS mission produces a heterogeneous team in which agents belonging to the same collective mission exhibit substantially different individual motion patterns over time. 

Escort Penetration Strike (EPS) 

The EPS mission consists of one primary mission agent and three escort agents. The mission is motivated by UAV penetration operations, in which an aircraft progresses through adversarial environments to reach and engage a protected target Xing, Li, Wang, Liu and Li (2024). Unlike the single-UAV penetration scenario considered in Xing et al. (2024),  

> Nagarani et al. Page 12 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems

the proposed mission models a coordinated team in which a primary penetration agent is supported by multiple escort agents that maintain formation and provide coordinated protection throughout the mission execution. During the first phase, the agents approach the operational region while exhibiting relatively coherent team motion. In the second phase, the primary agent continues progressing toward the mission objective, whereas the escort agents adjust their trajectories according to their supporting roles and the evolving team configuration. During the final phase, the primary mission agent proceeds toward the target and ini-tiates weapon engagement upon reaching the WEZ. Mean-while, the escort agents maintain a certain distance from the target and perform coordinated engagement behaviors while preserving their supporting configuration around the primary mission agent. Thus, the agents exhibit distinct role-dependent behaviors while collectively executing the same mission intent. The EPS mission therefore represents a heterogeneous team whose members exhibit different motion characteristics while remaining associated with the same collective intent. 

Anti-Ship Strike (ASS) 

The ASS mission comprises four heterogeneous agents: a low-altitude attacker, a left flanker, a right flanker, and a decoy. The mission is motivated by anti-ship strike opera-tions, where a primary attacker follows a carefully planned low-altitude, multi-stage approach trajectory to penetrate shipborne defenses before engaging the target Sun, You, Hua, Xu, Wang and Yang (2025). During the initial phase, the agents approach the operational region as a coordinated group. In the second phase, the agents begin to exhibit role-specific behavioral patterns. The low-altitude attacker transitions toward a lower-altitude approach trajectory, while the flankers maneuver along different lateral directions and the decoy exhibits a distinct trajectory pattern. During the final phase, the low-altitude attacker continues its approach toward the target and initiates weapon engagement upon reaching the WEZ. Meanwhile, the left and right flankers maintain spatially separated positions and perform engage-ment behaviors toward the target, while the decoy continues its distinct maneuver pattern. This phase therefore exhibits heterogeneous role-dependent engagement behaviors asso-ciated with the same collective mission. The simultaneous presence of altitude-dependent, lateral, and diversionary mo-tion characteristics introduces substantial intra-team behav-ioral diversity and provides a challenging setting for discov-ering team membership from temporal interaction patterns. 

Reconnaissance (Recon) 

The Recon mission consists of homogeneous agents that share similar behavioral capabilities and collectively execute a sequence of temporally evolving activities. During the first phase, the agents explore the operational region to search for the target. Their trajectories may spatially diverge during this phase to increase the explored area. Once the target is detected, the mission transitions to the second phase, during which the agents converge toward the detected target region. In the final phase, the agents perform coordinated target-tracking behavior by maintaining observation of the target while adapting their trajectories according to its movement. This phased behavior is motivated by recent studies on multistage UAV swarm missions involving distributed target search and subsequent information aggregation Zhao et al. (2025). Unlike the other missions, the Recon agents are not differentiated through predefined heterogeneous functional roles. Instead, the collective intent is characterized primarily by the shared temporal evolution from exploration to con-vergence and subsequent tracking. This mission therefore evaluates whether the proposed framework can recognize collective intent from temporally evolving coordination pat-terns among homogeneous agents. 

No Mission (NM) 

In addition to the four coordinated missions, the case study also includes aircraft that are not engaged in any of the modeled missions. These aircraft constitute the NM class and follow trajectories that do not exhibit the struc-tured role differentiation or phase-dependent coordination patterns associated with SSS, EPS, ASS, or Recon. The inclusion of the NM class prevents the prediction task from being restricted to distinguishing only among predefined coordinated missions and requires the model to differentiate mission-specific collective behavior from agents exhibiting non-mission motion patterns. The coordinated missions evolve through three temporal phases representing the progression from initial movement, through mission-specific behavioral evolution, to the final mission execution stage. Although the semantic interpreta-tion of these phases differs across missions, the phased sce-nario design enables the generation of temporally evolving interaction patterns and gradual behavioral transitions. This is particularly important for evaluating the proposed tem-poral framework, since the collective intent of a team may not be immediately distinguishable from early observations and becomes increasingly evident as agent behaviors and coordination patterns evolve over time. All scenarios are simulated using SCRIMMAGE, from which the time-varying states and trajectories of the aircraft are recorded. Different simulation scenarios contain differ-ent combinations of coordinated missions and NM aircraft rather than including all five intent labels in every scenario. Consequently, the generated dataset exhibits variations in the number of active teams, team composition, heterogeneous and homogeneous agent behaviors, and interactions among agents belonging to different collective intents. These vari-ations provide a challenging evaluation environment for as-sessing the generalization capability of the proposed frame-work under diverse multi-agent interaction configurations. In the considered multi-agent environment, the node feature vector is defined as 

𝐱 𝑡 𝑖 = [ 𝐩 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝐯 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝑠 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝜃 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝜔 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝑎 𝑡 𝑖 

] (21)  

> Nagarani et al. Page 13 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems

where 𝐩 𝑡 𝑖 = [ 𝑥 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝑦 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝑧 𝑡 𝑖 ] denotes the three-dimensional posi-tion of agent 𝑣 𝑖 , and 𝐯 𝑡 𝑖 = [ 𝑣 𝑡 𝑥,𝑖 , 𝑣 𝑡 𝑦,𝑖 , 𝑣 𝑡 𝑧,𝑖 ] represents its three-dimensional velocity. The scalar 𝑠 𝑡 𝑖 denotes the speed of the agent, 𝜃 𝑡 𝑖 represents its heading angle, 𝜔 𝑡 𝑖 denotes the turn rate characterizing the temporal variation of the heading, and 

𝑎 𝑡 𝑖 represents the acceleration of the agent. For every interacting pair of agents (𝑣 𝑖 , 𝑣 𝑗 ), an edge feature vector 𝐞 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 ∈ ℝ𝑑 𝑒 is constructed to characterize their relative spatial and motion relationships. The edge feature vector is defined as 

𝐞 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 =

[

𝑑 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 , Δ𝐩 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 , Δ𝐯 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 , Δ𝑠 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 , Δ𝑧 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 , Δ𝜃 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 , 𝑣 𝑡 𝑐,𝑖𝑗 

]

. (22) where 𝑑 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 denotes the relative distance between agents 𝑣 𝑖 

and 𝑣 𝑗 , Δ𝐩 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 represents their relative position vector, and 

Δ𝐯 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 denotes their relative velocity vector. The scalar Δ𝑠 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 

represents the difference in speed between the two agents, while Δ𝑧 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 denotes their relative altitude. Furthermore, Δ𝜃 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 

represents the difference in heading, and 𝑣 𝑡 𝑐,𝑖𝑗 denotes the closing velocity, which characterizes the rate at which the distance between the two agents changes over time and indi-cates whether the agents are converging toward or diverging away from each other. For the air combat case study, the behavioral node fea-tures are selected directly from the node feature vector defined in 21. Specifically, the agent’s three-dimensional position, velocity, speed, heading angle, turn rate, and ac-celeration are used to characterize its intrinsic motion dy-namics and behavioral evolution over time. These features describe the temporal behavior of each agent independently and exclude explicit relational information. 

5.2. Results and Discussion 

This section presents the experimental results and eval-uates the proposed framework in terms of overall predictive performance, convergence behavior, early prediction capa-bility, and temporal prediction stability. The performance of the proposed MR-TGN is first compared with the baseline models using conventional learning metrics, including val-idation accuracy and training loss. Subsequently, the tem-poral characteristics of intent recognition are investigated using the Early Correct Sample (ECS) and Time To Sta-ble Sample at the 𝑘 𝑡ℎ timestep (TTSS@k) metrics. This evaluation strategy enables the proposed framework to be assessed not only in terms of its final predictive performance, but also in terms of how quickly and consistently correct intent predictions can be obtained from partially observed interaction sequences. 

5.2.1. Experimental setup 

The proposed MR-TGN model was implemented using the PyTorch framework. Table 2 presents the implementa-tion details and hyperparameter settings used to obtain the reported experimental results. Unless otherwise specified, the same configuration was maintained throughout all exper-iments to ensure a consistent and reproducible evaluation.           

> Table 2
> Implementation details and hyperparameter settings.
> Parameter Value
> Optimizer Adam Learning rate 0.001 Temporal window length 20 timestamps Number of epochs 100 Node embedding dimension 32 Memory embedding dimension 32 Number of attention heads 4Dropout rate 0.3 Number of latent prototypes ( 𝐾 )8

The influence of the latent prototype parameter ( 𝐾 ) is ana-lyzed separately in the 5.2.4 section. The proposed framework is compared with several repre-sentative spatio-temporal learning models, including Graph Attention Networks (GAT), Attention-LSTM, GNN+Bi-LSTM, Spatio-Temporal Graph Convolutional Networks (STGCN), Dynamic Self-Attention Networks (DySAT), a TGN-based baseline, and the proposed MR-TGN. Wher-ever applicable, the baseline encoders are integrated into a common prediction framework to ensure a fair comparison by isolating the contribution of the representation learning module from that of the prediction heads. For interaction-aware models, the same team assignment and intent pre-diction heads are employed. In contrast, models that learn only individual temporal representations, such as Attention-LSTM, do not explicitly capture inter-agent relationships and therefore are evaluated only for the intent prediction task. These baseline models were selected because they rep-resent the major categories of sequence and graph-based learning approaches for spatio-temporal modeling. GAT and Attention-LSTM each capture only one aspect of the prob-lem. GAT effectively models spatial relationships through graph attention mechanisms but does not explicitly capture long-term temporal evolution [Zhang et al. (2020b); Sun et al. (2023). Conversely, Attention-LSTM learns temporal dependencies using attention-enhanced recurrent networks but lacks an explicit mechanism to model inter-agent spa-tial interactions[Mavsar et al. (2024). GNN+Bi-LSTM and STGCN both integrate spatial and temporal information for spatio-temporal representation learning. However, they gen-erally rely on static or predefined graph structures, limiting their ability to model continuously evolving interactions among agents in highly dynamic multi-agent environments. While GNN+Bi-LSTM learns spatial and temporal depen-dencies in separate stages dynamics [Vitulyova et al. (2025)], STGCN performs joint spatio-temporal graph convolutions [Luo et al. (2024); Siabi et al. (2026)], yet both assume rel-atively stable graph connectivity. DySAT employs temporal self-attention to learn evolving graph representations Sankar et al. (2020)] but primarily operates on graph snapshots without maintaining persistent node memory. The TGN baseline addresses this limitation through a memory module that continuously updates node representations over time,  

> Nagarani et al. Page 14 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems

enabling effective continuous-time temporal learning [Rossi et al. (2020); Jeon et al. (2025)]. However, it learns generic node representations without explicitly capturing functional role similarities among heterogeneous agents. In contrast, the proposed MR-TGN extends TGN with meta-role repre-sentation learning, enabling agents with similar behavioral functions to share transferable knowledge while preserving temporal interaction dynamics, thereby improving both team assignment and collective intent prediction. All reported results are evaluated on the held-out test set comprising multiple independently generated scenarios. Unless otherwise stated, the reported team assignment (TA) and intent prediction (IP) accuracies are dataset-level met-rics obtained by aggregating predictions from all eligible temporal graph states across the test scenarios, rather than results obtained from any individual scenario. For the phase-wise evaluation, predictions belonging to the same mission phase are pooled across all test scenarios, and the corre-sponding accuracy is computed over the resulting set of predictions. Similarly, the results under the full-history and partial-observation settings are computed using all eligible predictions from the complete test set under the respective observation protocol. The same fixed scenario-level train, validation, and test partitions are used for all compared methods to ensure a consistent and fair evaluation. 

5.2.2. Predictive Performance Evaluation 

Fig. 4 presents the variation of validation accuracy of the evaluated models over 50 training epochs. The results reveal a progressive improvement in predictive performance as the modeling capability advances from isolated spatial or temporal learning toward joint spatio-temporal interac-tion modeling, persistent historical memory, and latent role-aware reasoning. GAT and Attention-LSTM exhibit com-paratively lower validation performance because they model only one aspect of the multi-agent dynamics. GNN+Bi-LSTM improves performance by combining spatial encod-ing with sequential temporal learning, while STGCN pro-vides stronger modeling of local spatio-temporal coordina-tion patterns. However, GNN+LSTM limits direct model-ing of evolving coordination due to its factorized spatial and temporal processing, while STGNN is constrained by its bounded temporal receptive field and lack of persistent memory for capturing long-range historical dependencies. DySAT achieves higher validation accuracy by combining structural attention over graph snapshots with temporal self-attention across evolving node representations. TGN fur-ther improves performance through persistent node-level memory, which preserves historical interaction states and allows current agent representations to depend on previously observed interactions and maneuver evolution. This capa-bility is particularly important in multi-phase multi-agent scenarios, where similar instantaneous configurations may correspond to different intents depending on the preceding interaction history. In addition to this, the proposed meta-role memory learns globally shared, task-optimized latent behavioral prototypes that capture recurring within-agent behavioral dynamics associated with functional roles. Tables 3 and 4 analyze the team assignment and in-tent prediction performance at different stages of mission progression. Under the full-history observation setting, a clear difference can be observed between the difficulty of team assignment and intent prediction during the early mis-sion phase. In Phase 1, most agents move toward the op-erational region and maintain relatively consistent spatial and kinematic relationships with their teammates. Features such as relative distance, heading alignment, and velocity correlation therefore provide sufficient relational evidence for identifying agents that move as part of the same team. Consequently, all models achieve comparatively high team-assignment accuracy during this phase. In contrast, intent prediction is considerably more difficult in Phase 1. The early ingress behaviors of different missions may exhibit substantial similarities, since the agents have not yet initi-ated their mission-specific tactical maneuvers. For example, agents belonging to strike, escort, and anti-ship missions may all exhibit coordinated movement toward the opera-tional region. Although these observations provide evidence regarding team membership, they contain limited informa-tion about the subsequent tactical objective of the team. This explains the substantial difference between team-assignment and intent-prediction accuracy during Phase 1. During Phase 2, agents begin to separate according to their tactical roles, producing mission-dependent changes in their spatial and maneuver relationships. The evolution of relative distance, heading alignment, velocity correlation, together with relative turn-rate and acceleration differences, provides increasingly discriminative evidence of coordi-nated role separation. Consequently, intent-prediction accu-racy improves substantially across the models. However, in-stantaneous spatial models remain limited because they infer the mission primarily from the current relational configura-tion. Temporal models can additionally exploit the preceding ingress behavior and the evolution of interactions leading to role separation, resulting in improved intent recognition. Phase 3 corresponds to mission-specific execution, such as attack, tracking, escort support attack, or coordinated maritime strike. Although the current agent behaviors be-come more distinctive, instantaneous observations may still be ambiguous because multiple missions contain attack-related maneuvers and heterogeneous agents belonging to the same team may exhibit strongly divergent trajectories. Temporal models achieve higher performance because suf-ficient interaction history has accumulated by this stage. In particular, TGN retains the historical evolution of pairwise interactions from the earlier coordinated ingress and role-separation phases, enabling the current role-dependent be-haviors to be interpreted in their preceding relational context. MR-TGN consistently achieves the highest team-assignment and intent-prediction accuracy across the three phases. The improvement over TGN indicates that temporal interaction  

> Nagarani et al. Page 15 of 22

Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems 

Figure 4: Validation Accuracy for the proposed MR-TGN and baseline models. 

Table 3 

Phase-wise TA and IP accuracy over all eligible predictions in the held-out test scenarios under the full-history observation setting. Model Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 Overall TA Acc. IP Acc. TA Acc. IP Acc. TA Acc. IP Acc. TA Acc. IP Acc. GAT 95.0 70.1 89.2 81.5 82.7 85.6 89.0 79.1 Attention-LSTM – 69.4 – 85.3 – 90.8 – 81.8 GNN+LSTM 93.1 70.8 90.8 86.9 89.5 91.7 91.1 83.1 STGNN 94.8 73.6 92.5 88.4 91.8 94.1 93.0 84.8 DySAT 91.7 74.2 93.0 90.6 93.5 95.2 92.8 89.3 TGN 95.2 75.6 95.1 92.8 95.5 96.2 95.3 91.5 

MR-TGN 96.3 78.9 96.8 94.7 97.1 97.4 96.7 92.7  

> Note: "–" indicates that the metric is not applicable, as Attention-LSTM models agents independently and does not support team assignment.

memory alone does not fully capture the recurring behav-ioral characteristics associated with heterogeneous tacti-cal roles. The meta-role memory provides additional role-aware behavioral context, enabling the model to distinguish agents exhibiting different tactical behaviors while preserv-ing their association with the same coordinated team. This complementary modeling of historical relational evolution and latent role-dependent behavior results in reliable team assignment and intent prediction throughout mission pro-gression. Attention-LSTM is evaluated only for the intent prediction task because it models each agent independently 

Table 4 

Phase-wise TA and IP accuracy over all eligible predictions in the held-out test scenarios when observation begins from Phase 2. Model Phase 2 Phase 3 Overall TA Acc. IP Acc. TA Acc. IP Acc. TA Acc. IP Acc. GAT 84.1 76.2 79.5 82.8 81.8 79.5 Attention-LSTM – 77.8 – 83.9 – 80.8 GNN+LSTM 86.2 81.3 86.9 88.1 86.6 84.7 STGNN 87.4 82.6 87.8 88.9 87.6 85.8 DySAT 88.1 84.4 90.2 92.3 89.2 88.4 TGN 90.8 87.5 93.1 94.0 92.0 90.8 

MR-TGN 93.5 90.6 95.4 93.1 94.5 91.4  

> Note: "–" indicates that the metric is not applicable, as Attention-LSTM models agents independently and does not support team assignment.

Nagarani et al. Page 16 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems 

through temporal sequence learning without explicitly cap-turing inter-agent interactions or team-level representations. Consequently, it does not produce the relational embeddings required for the team assignment task, and the corresponding entries are marked as not applicable in Table 3, 4. Table 4 presents the phase-wise team assignment and in-tent prediction performance under the partial-history obser-vation setting, where agents become observable only from Phase 2 and no information from the initial ingress phase is available. This setting is considerably more challenging because the first available observations correspond to an ongoing role-separation stage, where agents belonging to the same team already exhibit heterogeneous and increasingly divergent behaviors. Consequently, the models must infer team membership and mission intent without observing the preceding coordinated evolution that established the under-lying interaction patterns. GAT relies solely on the current graph snapshot and therefore infers team relationships from instantaneous node and edge features. When observation begins in Phase 2, co-ordinated agents may already differ significantly in heading, velocity, altitude, and maneuver characteristics due to role specialization. Without historical interaction information, these instantaneous differences can be difficult to distin-guish from unrelated behaviors, leading to reduced team assignment and intent prediction accuracy. Attention-LSTM also experiences reduced intent prediction accuracy since the shortened observation window provides less temporal evidence for learning mission-specific behavioral evolution. Because it models agents independently, no team assignment results are reported. The performance degradation of GNN+LSTM and STGNN is comparatively smaller, as both models continue to exploit the available spatio-temporal observations after Phase 2. However, the missing ingress phase removes part of the temporal context that characterizes the transition from coordinated formation to tactical role separation, thereby limiting their ability to fully capture mission progression. DySAT demonstrates greater robustness under partial ob-servation by selectively attending to the most informative spatial and temporal interactions within the observed in-terval. Nevertheless, the absence of the initial coordination phase still reduces the available temporal evidence, leading to a moderate decline compared with the full-history setting. Compared with the full-history setting, TGN exhibits a moderate performance degradation bec MR-TGN shows the smallest performance degradation among all evaluated models. Even when observations begin from Phase 2, the learned latent behavioral prototypes complement the ac-cumulated temporal interactions by associating partially observed behaviors with higher-level role representations. This enables the model to recover team associations and mission intent more effectively despite the missing ingress phase, demonstrating its robustness under incomplete obser-vation.ause the initial team interaction context established during Phase 1 is unavailable. Nevertheless, it consistently outperforms DySAT, indicating that the accumulated inter-action history from the observed phases remains effective for team assignment and intent prediction. MR-TGN shows the smallest performance degradation among all evaluated models. Even when observations begin from Phase 2, the learned latent behavioral prototypes complement the accu-mulated temporal interactions by associating partially ob-served behaviors with higher-level role representations. This enables the model to recover team associations and mission intent more effectively despite the missing ingress phase, demonstrating its robustness under incomplete observation. 

5.2.3. Temporal Performance Evaluation Using Early and Stability Metrics 

While conventional classification metrics provide an overall assessment of model performance, they do not fully characterize the temporal behaviour of predictions in dy-namic multi-agent environments. In such environments, the practical effectiveness of a prediction framework depends not only on whether the underlying intent is correctly identified, but also on how early a reliable prediction can be obtained and whether the predicted intent remains stable over subsequent observations. Therefore, in addition to conventional performance measures, ECS and TTSS@k are adopted to assess the temporal characteristics of the proposed framework and provide a more comprehensive evaluation of its prediction capability. Early and stable prediction is particularly important in safety-critical and time-sensitive multi-agent applications such as air combat, autonomous surveillance, cooperative robotics, and intelligent transportation systems. In an air combat scenario, for example, an agent’s intent may evolve progressively through its interactions, motion patterns, and coordination with other agents. Waiting until a complete trajectory is observed before identifying the intent may significantly reduce the time available for threat assess-ment, tactical planning, and appropriate countermeasures. Consequently, a model capable of identifying the correct intent from partial observations is more operationally useful than a model that achieves high classification accuracy only after observing most of the trajectory. Moreover, an isolated correct prediction at an early sample does not necessarily in-dicate reliable intent recognition, since predictions may fluc-tuate as additional observations become available. Hence, both early prediction capability and temporal stability are considered in the evaluation. The ECS metric measures the earliest sample at which the predicted intent matches the ground-truth intent. For a trajectory containing a sequence of predictions, ECS identi-fies the first occurrence of a correct prediction, irrespective of whether the subsequent predictions remain correct. A lower ECS value therefore indicates that the model is capable of recognizing the underlying intent using fewer temporal observations. This metric provides a direct measure of the early prediction capability of the model and enables the comparison of different methods in terms of how quickly   

> Nagarani et al. Page 17 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems
> Figure 5: Cumulative number of agents achieving correct intent prediction within different ECS thresholds for the proposed MR-TGN and baseline models.

meaningful intent information can be extracted from evolv-ing agent interactions. Fig. 5 presents the cumulative distri-bution of ECS values obtained by the proposed MR-TGN and the baseline models at different observation thresholds. The results demonstrate a progressive improvement in early intent recognition from conventional spatial and sequential models to spatio-temporal graph-based approaches. Among the compared methods, MR-TGN achieves the highest num-ber of correctly predicted nodes at the earliest observation thresholds. Specifically, MR-TGN correctly identifies the intent of 8 nodes within the first five samples and 11 nodes within the first ten samples, compared with 6 and 9 nodes, respectively, for TGN. In contrast, several baseline models, particularly GAT, fail to correctly recognize any node within the first five samples and require considerably longer obser-vation sequences to obtain correct predictions. Furthermore, MR-TGN correctly predicts the intent of 12 nodes within 15 samples and all 13 nodes within 20 samples, whereas the remaining methods require longer observation horizons or fail to achieve comparable early recognition performance. These results indicate that the proposed meta-role-based temporal representation enables the model to extract dis-criminative intent information from shorter interaction his-tories, thereby improving its suitability for time-sensitive multi-agent decision-making scenarios. However, since ECS considers only the first correct prediction, it does not account for subsequent prediction fluctuations and therefore cannot independently characterize the temporal reliability of the predicted intent. To complement ECS, TTSS@k is employed to evaluate how quickly the model produces consistently correct pre-dictions. TTSS@k identifies the earliest sample at which the model generates 𝑘 consecutive correct predictions. In this work, 𝑘 = 3 is adopted, and the corresponding metric is denoted as TTSS@3. Specifically, TTSS@3 determines the earliest sample from which three consecutive predictions agree with the ground-truth intent. Compared with ECS, this metric imposes a stronger temporal consistency requirement and reduces the influence of isolated or transient correct predictions. Fig. 6 presents the node-wise TTSS@3 values obtained by the proposed MR-TGN and the baseline meth-ods. The heatmap reveals clear differences in the time re-quired by different models to establish temporally consistent intent predictions. Conventional graph-based and sequential models generally exhibit higher TTSS@3 values, indicating that a longer interaction history is required before stable predictions can be obtained. Although spatio-temporal graph models improve prediction stability by jointly exploiting relational and temporal information, the proposed MR-TGN consistently achieves lower TTSS@3 values across the eval-uated nodes. This demonstrates that MR-TGN not only pro-duces correct predictions at earlier observation stages, as indicated by the ECS results, but also converts these early predictions into temporally consistent predictions within a shorter observation horizon. The improvement can be at-tributed to the complementary contributions of temporal in-teraction modeling and meta-role representations, which en-able the framework to preserve evolving interaction patterns while exploiting latent behavioral similarities among agents. Consequently, the proposed model provides early and stable intent prediction, an important characteristic for multi-agent applications in which downstream tactical decisions must be made before complete trajectories become available. The joint analysis of ECS and TTSS@3 provides com-plementary insights into the temporal prediction behaviour of the proposed framework. A small difference between ECS and TTSS@3 indicates that the model stabilizes shortly after its first correct prediction, while a large difference suggests   

> Nagarani et al. Page 18 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems
> Figure 6: Node-wise comparison of TTSS@3 values for the proposed MR-TGN and baseline models

that the early predictions exhibit temporal fluctuations be-fore consistent correct predictions are achieved. Therefore, evaluating both metrics enables a more comprehensive as-sessment of the suitability of the proposed framework for dynamic multi-agent environments. 

5.2.4. Sensitivity Analysis 

The sensitivity of MR-TGN to the number of latent role prototypes was investigated by varying the role-memory capacity as 𝐾 ∈ {2 , 4, 6, 8, 10 , 12} . The influence of 𝐾 was evaluated using the ECS and TTSS@3 metrics. Since lower values are preferred for both metrics, configurations whose observations are concentrated toward the lower-left region of the ECS– TTSS@3 space indicate better temporal predic-tion performance. To ensure that the selection of the role-memory capacity was not influenced by scenario-specific trajectory variations, each value of 𝐾 was evaluated across multiple scenarios, and the final configuration was selected based on the aggregated ECS and TTSS@3 performance over all evaluated scenarios. As shown in Fig. 7, configurations with a small number of latent role prototypes, particularly 𝐾 = 2 and 𝐾 =4, exhibit a wider dispersion of observations and several cases with high ECS and TTSS@3 values. This indicates that a limited role-memory capacity is insufficient to rep-resent the diversity of recurring behavioral patterns exhib-ited by heterogeneous agents, resulting in delayed correct recognition and reduced prediction stability. Increasing the number of role prototypes improves the temporal prediction performance, with the observations progressively shifting toward the lower-ECS and lower-TTSS@3 region. Among the evaluated configurations, 𝐾 = 8 provides a favorable balance between early recognition and prediction stability, as most observations are concentrated at comparatively low values of both metrics. Increasing the role-memory capacity further to 𝐾 = 10 or 𝐾 = 12 does not provide a consistent improvement in either metric, indicating diminishing bene-fits from introducing additional latent role prototypes. These results suggest that an insufficient number of role prototypes limits the behavioral representation capacity of the global role memory, whereas excessively increasing the number of prototypes provides limited additional benefit and may introduce redundant latent behavioral representations. Therefore, 𝐾 = 8 was selected as the number of latent role prototypes for the remaining experiments, as it achieves a suitable trade-off between early intent recognition, temporal prediction stability, and model complexity. 

5.2.5. Ablation Study 

Table 5 presents the ablation results obtained by system-atically removing the major components of MR-TGN while retaining the same experimental settings. The full MR-TGN achieves the best performance, with an intent prediction accuracy of 92 .7% , demonstrating that the proposed com-ponents provide complementary contributions to the overall framework. Removing the global role memory reduces the   

> Nagarani et al. Page 19 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems
> Figure 7: Sensitivity Analysis on the Number of Latent Role Prototypes

intent prediction accuracy to 90 .72% . This degradation indi-cates that the globally shared role prototypes provide useful behavioral abstractions beyond the agent-specific tempo-ral representations produced by the TGN encoder. Without node memory, the model cannot persistently accumulate and update information from previous interactions and agent states. Consequently, its predictions rely primarily on the currently available graph context and temporally local ob-servations, limiting its ability to represent long-term be-havioral evolution and historical dependencies. When the attention mechanism is removed, the model loses the ability to adaptively emphasize the neighboring interactions that are most informative for updating agent representations. This is particularly important in heterogeneous multi-agent envi-ronments, where different agents and pairwise interactions do not contribute equally to the evolving collective behavior. Finally, removing the team assignment head reduces the intent prediction accuracy to 89 .43% . The resulting degra-dation indicates that the team-assignment objective acts as an intermediate structural learning task that encourages the encoder and meta-role representations to preserve informa-tion relevant to agent grouping and coordinated behaviors. Overall, the ablation results demonstrate that the per-formance improvement of MR-TGN cannot be attributed to a single architectural component. Node memory provides persistent historical information, the attention mechanism selectively models interaction relevance, the global role memory captures transferable latent behavioral patterns, and the team assignment head encourages explicit learning of the underlying team structure. Among these components, node memory produces the largest performance reduction when removed, highlighting the importance of long-term historical dependencies for dynamic team-intent recogni-tion. Nevertheless, the consistent degradation observed for all ablated variants confirms that the proposed components       

> Table 5
> Ablation study results of the proposed MR-TGN model.
> Variant Intent Accuracy (%)
> MR-TGN (Full) 92 .73 ± 0 .37
> w/o Global Role Memory 90 .72 ± 0 .51
> w/o Node Memory 82 .36 ± 0 .83
> w/o Attention 87 .91 ± 0 .64
> w/o Team Assignment Head 89 .43 ± 0 .56

provide distinct and complementary contributions to the complete MR-TGN framework. 

5.2.6. Computational Complexity Analysis 

In a conventional TGN, each node 𝑖 maintains a 𝑑 -dimensional temporal memory vector 𝐦 𝑖 (𝑡 ) ∈ ℝ𝑑 , which summarizes its interaction history up to time 𝑡 . Given a batch containing 𝑁 nodes and 𝐸 temporal interactions, the domi-nant computational cost in TGN arises during the neighbor aggregation step used for embedding computation, where multi-head temporal attention applies learnable linear trans-formations to node and edge representations. This operation incurs a complexity of 𝑂 (𝐸𝑑 2). The memory update for each node, implemented using GRU, incurs an additional cost of 

𝑂 (𝑁𝑑 2). Therefore, the overall computational complexity of the baseline TGN per batch is 𝑂 (𝐸𝑑 2 + 𝑁𝑑 2), while the memory requirement for storing node states scales as 

𝑂 (𝑁𝑑 ).The proposed MR-TGN augments the baseline TGN by introducing a small set of 𝐾 meta-role prototypes  ={𝐫 1, 𝐫 2, … , 𝐫 𝐾 }, where each prototype 𝐫 𝑘 ∈ ℝ𝑑 . Each node computes relevance-weighted interactions with these role prototypes to obtain role-aware contextual information, resulting in an additional role-attention cost of 𝑂 (𝑁𝐾𝑑 ).The storage requirement for the role prototypes is 𝑂 (𝐾𝑑 ).Since the number of roles 𝐾 is small and independent  

> Nagarani et al. Page 20 of 22

Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems 

of the number of nodes 𝑁 and interactions 𝐸 , the added computational and memory overhead scales linearly with 

𝑁 and is negligible compared to the quadratic terms in the baseline TGN complexity. As a result, the proposed MR-TGN incurs minimal additional cost. 

## 6. Conclusion 

This work addresses the problem of collective intent pre-diction in dynamic multi-agent environments, where hetero-geneous agents exhibit coordinated behaviours, evolving in-teraction patterns, and only partially observable trajectories. To address these challenges, a MR-TGN framework was pro-posed for learning team-aware representations and predict-ing collective intent from dynamic interaction graphs. The framework integrates rich agent-level and pairwise interac-tion features with temporal graph representation learning, persistent memory, and globally shared role representations to capture instantaneous coordination patterns, historical dependencies, and recurring functional behaviours across heterogeneous agents. A sequential multi-task learning strat-egy was further employed to first discover the underlying team structure and subsequently exploit the learned team information for collective intent prediction. The effectiveness of the proposed framework was eval-uated using multi-agent scenarios involving heterogeneous missions and coordinated team behaviours under both full and partial observation settings. Comparative experiments with spatial, temporal, spatial–temporal, and dynamic graph-based models demonstrated the effectiveness of combining persistent temporal memory, interaction-aware representa-tion learning, role information, and team-aware reasoning for collective intent prediction. In addition to conventional classification performance, the temporal behaviour of the models was evaluated using Early Correct Sample and Time To Stable Sample metrics, providing further insight into how early and reliably the underlying collective intent can be inferred from evolving observations. The experimental results showed that MR-TGN provides more accurate and temporally reliable predictions, particularly under scenarios where only partial observations of evolving multi-agent behaviors are available. The analysis of the learned role representations fur-ther demonstrates that a compact set of globally shared role vectors can capture recurring functional behaviour pat-terns across different teams and mission contexts. The abla-tion studies confirm the contribution of the major architec-tural components and highlighted the importance of persis-tent memory, temporal attention, role-aware representation learning, and team-aware intent reasoning. These findings indicate that explicitly modelling both agent-level functional behaviours and dynamically emerging team structures pro-vides an effective representation for reasoning about coordi-nated heterogeneous multi-agent systems. Although air combat is used as a case study in this work, the proposed framework is applicable to a broad class of dy-namic multi-agent systems characterized by heterogeneous agents, evolving coordination patterns, and incomplete ob-servations. Future work will investigate online adaptation to previously unseen coordination strategies and intents, as well as uncertainty-aware prediction under noisy and in-complete observations. In addition, extending the framework towards zero-shot collective intent prediction and continual adaptation of role representations will be explored to further enhance its generalization capability in evolving multi-agent environments with novel coordination behaviors. 

## References 

Busch, F., Johnson, J., Zhu, E.L., Borrelli, F., 2022. A gaussian process model for opponent prediction in autonomous racing, in: 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 8186–8191. doi: 10.1109/iros55552.2023.10341566 .DeMarco, K., Squires, E., Day, M., Pippin, C., 2019. Simulating collabo-rative robots in a massive multi-agent game environment (scrimmage), in: Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems, Springer International Publishing. pp. 283–297. Du, J., Lu, D., Li, F., Liu, K., Qiu, X., 2025a. Trajectory prediction and intention recognition based on cnn-gru. IEEE Access 13, 26945–26957. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3539931 .Du, J., Lu, D., Li, F., Liu, K., Qiu, X., 2025b. Trajectory prediction and intention recognition based on cnn-gru. IEEE Access 13, 26945–26957. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3539931 .Fan, S., Piao, H., Hu, Y., Jiang, F., Yang, R., 2024. Deep ad-hoc sub-team partition learning for multi-agent air combat cooperation, in: IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 3403– 3408. doi: 10.1109/IROS58592.2024.10801614 .Ge, Z., Yang, S., Tian, P., Chen, Z., 2024. Modeling rationality: Toward better performance against unknown agents in sequential games. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 54, 2966–2977. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2022. 3228812 .He, H., Boyd-Graber, J., 2016. Opponent modeling in deep reinforcement learning. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.05559 , arXiv:1609.05559 .Herik, H., Donkers, H., Spronck, P., 2005. Opponent modelling and com-mercial games. IEEE 2005 Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Games, CIG’05 . Hou, Y., Sun, M., Zhu, W., Zeng, Y.F., Piao, H., Chen, X., Zhang, Q., 2022. Behavior reasoning for opponent agents in multi-agent learning systems. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence 6, 1125–1136. doi: 10.1109/TETCI.2022.3147011 .Huo, L., Wang, C., Han, Y., 2025. Autonomous air combat decision making via graph neural networks and reinforcement learning. Scientific Reports 15. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-00463-y .Jeon, D.H., Zhu, L., Li, H., Li, P., Feng, J., Duan, T., Song, H.H., Tao, C., Niu, S., 2025. Leveraging vulnerabilities in temporal graph neural networks via strategic high-impact assaults, in: Proceedings of the 34th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. p. 1035–1045. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3746252.3761282 ,doi: 10.1145/3746252.3761282 .Li, Y., Liang, M., Li, H., Yang, Z., Du, L., Chen, Z., 2023. Deep learning-powered vessel traffic flow prediction with spatial-temporal attributes and similarity grouping. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelli-gence 126, 107012. doi: 10.1016/j.engappai.2023.107012 .Liu, C., Cong, J., Zhao, T., Zhu, E., 2023a. Improving agent decision payoffs via a new framework of opponent modeling. Mathematics 11, 3062. doi: 10.3390/math11143062 .Liu, X., Peters, L., Alonso-Mora, J., 2023b. Learning to play trajectory games against opponents with unknown objectives. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 8, 4139–4146. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2023.3280809 .Liu, Y., Ding, D., Tan, M., Luo, Y., Li, N., Zhou, H., 2025. Tactical coordination-based decision making for unmanned combat aerial vehi-cles maneuvering in within-visual-range air combat. Aerospace 12, 193. doi: 10.3390/aerospace12030193 .

Nagarani et al. Page 21 of 22 Learning Team-Aware Intent in Multi-Agent Systems 

Liu, Y., Wang, W., Hu, Y., Hao, J., Chen, X., Gao, Y., 2020. Multi-agent game abstraction via graph attention neural network, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI Press. pp. 7211– 7218. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i05.6211 .Luo, L., Li, B., Qi, C., 2024. Spatiotemporal multi-graph convolutional network-based provincial-day-level terrorism risk prediction. Risk Analysis 44, 1514–1534. doi: 10.1111/risa.14241 .Ma, Y., Shen, M., Zhao, Y., Li, Z., Tong, X., Zhang, Q., Wang, Z., 2021. Opponent portrait for multiagent reinforcement learning in competitive environment. International Journal of Intelligent Systems 36, 7461– 7474. doi: 10.1002/int.22594 .Mavsar, M., Morimoto, J., Ude, A., 2024. Gan-based semi-supervised training of lstm nets for intention recognition in cooperative tasks. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 9, 263–270. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2023. 3333231 .Piao, H., Han, Y., Chen, H., Peng, X., Fan, S., Sun, Y., Liang, C., Liu, Z., Sun, Z., Zhou, D., 2023. Complex relationship graph abstraction for autonomous air combat collaboration: A learning and expert knowledge hybrid approach. Expert Systems with Applications 215, 119285. Queralta, J.P., Taipalmaa, J., Pullinen, B.C., Sarker, V., Gia, T.N., Ten-hunen, H., Gabbouj, M., Raitoharju, J., Westerlund, T., 2020. Collabo-rative multi-robot search and rescue: Planning, coordination, perception, and active vision. IEEE Access 8, 191617–191643. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS. 2020.3030190 .Rossi, E., Chamberlain, B., Frasca, F., Eynard, D., Monti, F., Bronstein, M., 2020. Temporal graph networks for deep learning on dynamic graphs. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.10637 , arXiv:2006.10637 .Sankar, A., Wu, Y., Gou, L., Zhang, W., Yang, H., 2020. DySAT: Deep Neural Representation Learning on Dynamic Graphs via Self-Attention Networks. Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. doi: 10.1145/3336191.3371845 .Schneider, S., Lee, J.H., Mathis, M.W., 2023. Learnable latent embeddings for joint behavioural and neural analysis. Nature 617, 360–368. doi: 10. 1038/s41586-023-06031-6 .Siabi, N., Son, R., Thomas, M., Irrgang, C., Saynisch-Wagner, J., 2026. Innovative application of a traffic-prediction spatio-temporal graph con-volutional network for dengue disease forecasting. Scientific Reports 16. doi: 10.1038/s41598-026-36225-7 .Sun, C., Li, C., Lin, X., Zheng, T., Meng, F., Rui, X., Wang, Z., 2023. Attention-based graph neural networks: A survey. Artificial Intelligence Review 56, 2263–2310. doi: 10.1007/s10462-023-10577-2 .Sun, J., You, S., Hua, D., Xu, Z., Wang, P., Yang, Z., 2025. Simulation and optimization of multi-phase terminal trajectory for three-dimensional anti-ship missiles based on hybrid mopso. Algorithms 18, 278. doi: 10. 3390/a18050278 .Tao, X., Li, H., Liang, B., Shi, Y., Xu, D., 2025. Fast and accurate multi-agent trajectory prediction for crowded unknown scenes. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering 22, 7606–7621. doi: 10.1109/TASE.2024.3466272 .Teng, F., Song, Y., Wang, G., Zhang, P., Wang, L., lin Zhang, Z., 2021. A gru-based method for predicting intention of aerial targets. Computa-tional Intelligence and Neuroscience 2021. Vitulyova, Y., Babenko, T., Kolesnikova, K., Kiktev, N., Abramkina, O., 2025. A hybrid approach using graph neural networks and lstm for attack vector reconstruction. Comput. 14, 301. doi: 10.3390/computers14080301 .Wang, J., Wang, Y., Li, H., Wang, Y., 2025. Attack intent recognition for incoming vehicles based on deep learning. IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems 61, 17607–17621. doi: 10.1109/TAES. 2025.3604398 .Wang, X., Yang, Z., Piao, H., Chai, S., Huang, J., Zhou, D., 2024. In-telligent recognition method of target tactical behavior intention in air combat based on deep learning. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 138, 109460. Wei, X., Lucey, P., Morgan, S., Sridharan, S., 2013. Sweet-spot: Using spa-tiotemporal data to discover and predict shots in tennis, in: Proceedings of the 7th MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference, Boston, MA, USA. Xia, J., Chen, M., Fang, W., 2023. Air combat intention recognition with incomplete information based on decision tree and gru network. Entropy 25. doi: 10.3390/e25040671 .Xing, Z., Li, D., Wang, Y., Liu, X., Li, H., 2024. Optimization of high-speed fixed-wing uav penetration strategy based on deep reinforcement learning. Aerospace Science and Technology 154, 109089. doi: 10.1016/ j.ast.2024.109089 .Yu, Y., Song, Z., Zhang, H., Liu, D., Li, L., Xie, B., 2026. Ship trajectory prediction method based on heterogeneous spatiotemporal graph neural networks. Applied Ocean Research 168, 104969. doi: 10.1016/j.apor. 2025.104969 .Zhang, C., Zhou, Y., Li, H., Liang, F., Song, Z., Yuan, K., 2023a. Combat intention recognition of air targets based on 1dcnn-bilstm. IEEE Access 11, 134504–134516. doi: 10.1109/access.2023.3337640 .Zhang, D., Yao, L., Wang, S., Chang, X., Liu, Y., 2020a. Making sense of spatio-temporal preserving representations for eeg-based human in-tention recognition. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 50, 3033–3044. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2019.2905157 .Zhang, J., Jiang, Z., Hu, X., Song, B., 2020b. A novel graph attention adversarial network for predicting disease-related associations. Methods doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2020.05.010 .Zhang, T., Guo, G., 2022. Graph attention lstm: A spatiotemporal approach for traffic flow forecasting. IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine 14, 190–196. doi: 10.1109/MITS.2020.2990165 .Zhang, Y., Guo, W., Su, J., Lv, P., Xu, M., 2023b. Bip-tree: Tree variant with behavioral intention perception for heterogeneous trajectory prediction. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 24, 9584– 9598. doi: 10.1109/TITS.2023.3271953 .Zhao, Y., Lu, S., Wang, C., Liu, Y., Ding, Y., Wang, H., 2025. Integrated reinforcement learning framework for uav swarm two-stage cooperative multitarget detection tasks. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 12, 9435– 9448. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3527157 .

Nagarani et al. Page 22 of 22