Title: Quantitative Promise Theory: Intentionality and Inference in Autonomous Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.08552v1

Published Time: Tue, 09 Jun 2026 01:27:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# Quantitative Promise Theory 

# Intentionality and Inference in Autonomous Agents 

Mark Burgess ChiTek-i AS May-June 2026 

Abstract —I discuss some quantitative representations of Promise Theory for processes involving autonomous agents. Agent models are common in software systems, machine learning, and biology, for example, but may also apply to physics and other forms of engineering. I describe how Bayesian probability and information theoretic optimization, including Active Inference, may be incorporated with promise semantics—as well as how Promise Theory supplements solutions, helping to avoid probabil-ity’s pitfalls, which include non-local coordination, calibrating, and normalizing probabilistic computations. The role of boundary conditions in constraining allowed states and selecting decision thresholds is a form of promise, and agent alignment provides a scalable definition of intent. Autonomous agents may congeal into swarms with superagent characteristics by trying to minimize their information, despite uncertainty that works to maximize it. The use of Promise Theory involves some research challenges as well as stylistic preferences. 

CONTENTS 

I Introduction 1I-A Dynamical variables, representations, and narratives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2I-B Shared reference concepts . . . . . . . . 3I-C Causality and determinism . . . . . . . 3

II Promise Theory 4II-A Notation for promises . . . . . . . . . . 4II-B Promise parameterization . . . . . . . . 5II-C Conditional promises . . . . . . . . . . 5II-D Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6II-E Spacetime embedding . . . . . . . . . . 6II-F Observation and measurement . . . . . 7II-G Scaling of agency and clocks . . . . . . 7II-H Instantaneous and average variables . . 7II-I Thresholds and decision making . . . . 8II-J Philosophical note . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

III Probability 10 III-A Axioms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 III-B Scale free and dimensionless . . . . . . 11 III-C Observables: event semantics . . . . . . 11 III-D Event dynamics: the role of time . . . . 12 III-E Discrimination by coincidence: jointly observed events . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 III-F Conditional events and reasoning in sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 III-G Sequential updating of estimates . . . . 14 III-H Generalized stochastic systems . . . . . 15 III-I Semantics of autonomous pipelines . . . 15 III-J Aggregation, confluence . . . . . . . . . 16 III-K Steady state behaviours . . . . . . . . . 16 III-L Non-steady state behaviours . . . . . . 17 III-M Weighted pathways as intentions: trajec-tories and stories . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 III-N Optimizing information with a least certainty principle . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 III-O Convergence of intent: Predictive Cod-ing and Active Inference . . . . . . . . 20 III-P Trust as a running cognitive attention potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 III-Q Semantic spacetime and paths . . . . . 25 III-R Remarks about probability . . . . . . . 26 

IV Quantum and statistical state descriptions 26 IV-A States generated by spacetime geometry 26 IV-B Density matrix representation for agent interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 

V Conclusions 28 

References 29 I. I NTRODUCTION 

Promise Theory describes the behaviours and constraints of so-called autonomous agents [1]. In Promise Theory, agents are understood to be the focal dynamical element in all phenomena. Think of them as somewhat analogous to the broad notion of ‘particles’ in physics. An agent is the embodiment of a standalone process. A promise is a property or signal that announces an agent’s internal capabilities or intentions to other agents. Think of this as a super generalization of the ‘charge’ concept in physics. In this context, it may be of interest to infer, calculate, or predict the evolution or trajectories of properties belonging to agents in space and time. Promise Theory was introduced [2] to clarify the dynamics and the semantics of agent behaviour, stemming from their behavioural constraints, especially in cases where this would normally be taken for granted or would be presumed on the basis of symmetry arguments. Promises are an idealization of intentionality, i.e. the functional roles of agents within a ‘distributed system. Agents are a model of independent localized processes, which ‘promise’ to fulfill certain behavioural roles, and which may therefore interact and form cooperative clusters to behave like ‘superagents’ on a larger scale. 

> arXiv:2606.08552v1 [cs.AI] 7 Jun 2026

Breaking with the traditions of multi-agent systems in computer science [3], promise theoretic agents are not assumed to be centrally controlled machines; rather their behaviour is entirely self-determined, and emerges through patterns of collective action at scale. Promise theoretic agents are thus causally independent, active elements in a process, rather than 

passive particles driven by forces from without. One may call such elements ‘cognitive agents’ in the sense that they accept certain information from outside and respond with a promised outcome, based entirely on interior reasoning, which is the threshold hallmark for independent agency and cognition. A promise plays a similar role to that of an equation of motion for a highly localized, mostly isolated process. The interior evolution of agents may be associated with the ‘keeping’ of promised behaviours; the exterior evolution is associated with interactions built on an economics of trust. This results in a fundamentally non-deterministic picture of systems. Much can be said simply by classifying constraints, and the bulk of previous work has focused on revealing the limitations on process semantics [1], since this is where autonomy plays a key role. It is tempting to use logical language for such constraints, especially when applied to artificial systems. Nevertheless, there remain operational questions of process rates and measures of produced inputs and outputs, and so forth, which depend on promises. The question I want to consider in this essay is what can be gained from a quantitative analysis of agents? Historically, the natural sciences have appealed directly to continuous quantitative variables to capture causal responses, with determinism implicitly expressed as a ‘known past’ driving ‘possible futures’. In natural science, established practices developed over generations allow researchers to take many underlying assumptions for granted, as a matter of long standing convention. Their conversations can therefore be abbreviated by a cocoon of implicit knowledge. Promise Theory, by contrast, has a role in scenarios that are less well established, and potentially less orderly. It adopts a ‘bottom up’ point of view, with such details exposed. Where there is uncertainty, science often defers to statistics and probability to smooth over the detailed issues with data sampling: this at the expense of an intentional coarse graining with associated entropy. Such coarse graining may result in a difference between ‘expected’ and ‘intended’ outcomes of agents. As with quantum mechanics, a partially observable constrained interior causality may result in probabilistic external behaviour. Agents are typically inscrutable processes, so one cannot know their internal workings explicitly. If we want to relate Promise Theory to dynamical theories that involve probability, then it is natural to begin by thinking of a promise as an autonomous constraint, i.e. a context for local behaviour, which brings constraints to bear. The way a promise is expressed might, itself, be an imperfect representation: coarse grained, approximate, with unknown dynamic variables, etc, but it remains as the residual ‘intention’ behind the behaviours encapsulated by an agent. What we observe is a form of conditioned behaviour, so we explore effective descriptions along a pipeline of mutual interactions, from promised origins to statistical outcomes. Both Promise Theory and Probability Theory have conditionals, referring to different aspects of prediction, so we need to be clear about their distinctions. 

A. Dynamical variables, representations, and narratives 

What quantitative measures might we look for, or calculate, in a theory of agents? Some possibilities come to mind:  

> •

Representative values of key dynamical variables associ-ated with the behaviour of an agent, including exterior values that are promised and dependent on interior ‘hidden’ variables.  

> •

An operational model of an agent’s interior processes involved in ‘keeping promises’, which includes generating output or handling input, including explaining finite resources and interior constraints 1. 

> •

A collaborative model of exterior promise keeping, explain-ing the substance of the promise and how it is represented, how it benefits other agents, including sampling rates and transmission currents.  

> •

A model of agent learning, pattern recognition, and inferential decision making.  

> •

Maps of the possible pathways or dynamical trajectories through an information pipeline.  

> •

Inferring an agent’s intent, in the absence of a promise, by observing it over time.  

> •

Distributed reasoning, e.g. reasoning networks, swarm intelligence, etc.  

> •

Long range order: calculating the alignment of agents with a particular intention as a common property within a larger population, e.g. the agents infected with a certain promise or belief. We must also consider the role of coarse graining and resolution 

of variables in preserving information from discrete samples. What is the minimum variable resolution to support a given process, e.g. long range wave transmission between agents? The frameworks I’ll consider are the following:  

> •

Promise Theory : emphasizes autonomous processes, i.e. phenomena with strictly local variables, centered on cellular, bounded regions, linked with a graph topology. It defines the protocols and limitations for interaction that result from strict accounting for causal independence.  

> •

Probability Theory : is a mixed picture that expresses methods for counting elements of sets. It does not depend on any particular scope, topology, or model of a system change. It is a key tool in statistics and stochastic systems.  

> •

Statistical and Quantum Mechanics : are formalisms for analyzing physical scenarios, with mixed conceptual content. Statistical physics refers to a scale of bulk ‘thermodynamic’ scenarios, while Quantum Mechanics refers to scenarios on the level of individual ‘particles’. 

> 1This is analogous to solving the physics of a mechanical system in a box, a potential well, or a central potential.
> 2

Probabilistic ideas further arise with three distinct interpreta-tions:  

> •

Past event frequencies (based on sufficient data about prior recorded behaviour, which is assumed to be accurate),  

> •

Bayesian beliefs (which concerns updating of prior esti-mates, which may or may not be accurate), and  

> •

Propensities (which are theoretical predictions of likeli-hood, not based on data). A propensity is a calculated value that resembles a potential 

for future happening 2. Bayesian probability is typically used for inference of propositions (hypothesis testing) based on obviously incomplete data. Many authors do not specify which of these semantics are being assumed. 

B. Shared reference concepts 

Every phenomenological model builds on a concept of space and time as a representation of change, i.e. the theatre in which phenomena unfold. The Euclidean space we use to model human level events is largely irrelevant to what happens for agent systems. The space of their configurations refers to interior variables, which are bounded and separate from one another. Channels for communicating influence describe the effective topology of an agent system, and the passing of time is measured by what happens within each agent independently. Every process is further represented with respect to its 

invariants . There is an implicit assumption that what one collects data about is a set of invariant, time-independent phenomena. So a complete characterization of repeatable 

phenomena can be represented by probability mass or density functions over these invariant characteristics. This is what leads to a consistent and thus meaningful representation, e.g. for the classification of events into different categories. The clearest way to define probabilities is in terms of sets and subsets, so the invariances typically represent a constant basis of sets that span a complete set of possible outcomes. We can define a number of terms here in order to establish a consistent language and notation across descriptions.  

> •

Observables a: Identifiable process characteristics, with distinct interpretational semantics. Observables represent the coherent concepts associated with process measure-ments (rather than their values), including ideas like energy, momentum, charge, potentials, signals, messages, etc. Observables are derived from the values of dynamical variables, and many authors will use these concepts interchangeably.  

> •

Dynamic variables : Dynamical variables are the memory cells of a dynamic system, describing its capacity for change. These may also called its degrees of freedom .These are the quantities that change as a result of its evolution. Their values are what we try to predict in a theory, and what we interpret as the result.  

> •

Measurement (event) ea, a = 1 , . . . , M : The extraction of a value for an observable. A particular observable may 

> 2Propensities were applied to statistical physics, including quantum mechan-ics by Karl Popper in 1957 [4]. This is the only plausible interpretation of probability for quantum mechanics.

vary over a fixed set of possible values, either discrete or continuous, corresponding to different states. The action of sampling the variables to extract that value leads to a measurement. The continuum hypothesis suggests that continuous variables are in fact approximations for a high density of possible discrete values.  

> •

States ωi, i = 1 , . . . , D : Distinguishable configurations of dynamical variables that represent distinct attributes of a process—sometimes called ‘state of the world’ as an indication that these are representative of a world model for the phenomena. States contain the information of which is sampled by interacting with the system, thus they ultimately express the possible alternatives for a process change—and may characterize different qualitative phenomena. When we denote a state, we refer to a snapshot of the physical system as a vector of ‘simul-taneous’ dynamical variables. States may be composed over different scales: microstates and macrostates refer to snapshots at opposite ends of the spacetime scale.  

> •

Constraints : limitations on the ability of process variables to express certain values. These may be maintained autonomously or ‘voluntarily’, or they may be effectively ‘imposed’ by virtue of interacting with the environment. Constraints include promises and boundary conditions. It’s not uncommon to speak of states and their values interchangeably, but I will try to be more precise. In a vector space, one may think of a low level ‘micro’ state as a vector, and its value as its coordinates relative to a spanning set of basis vectors. In a computational view, such states are vectors of memory. The definition of ‘state’ also varies considerably between different phenomena and their scales. It is associated with a distinct configuration of the degrees of freedom characterizing a system. Theoretically, such variables may be speculative or merely an effective handle, introduced for convenience, as we grapple with the unknown. 

C. Causality and determinism 

Prediction depends on how one state of a theory leads to another. All theories have to deal with questions about causality and determinism sooner rather than later. There is a certain ‘stylistic’ arbitrariness to dealing with what one doesn’t know. For example, a classical view of particles of matter is that they spontaneously follow unique trajectories by riding a guiding potential, supported by postulated conservation laws. They may exchange momenta by ‘collision’, etc. Measured outcomes are associated with defining the end of a continuous trajectory, under the assumption that such trajectories can be freely observed. What is interesting here is the separation of a description into two parts: an ambient guiding field, and a localized particle: continuum and discreteness on display simultaneously. In Quantum Mechanics, we replace classical trajectories with a sequence of state transitions. There is a smooth trajectory for a guiding field (the wavefunction), but a discontinuous selection of subsequent state. The theory predicts that only specific allowed values can be measured, one at a time. The 

> 3

set of outcomes is determined by the wavefunction which is determined by boundary conditions, something like a promise; however, the selection of which precise state is not determined, and is thus treated as probabilistic. Nothing in the theory explains how measurement outcomes are actually derived from the theoretical evolution of probabilities—because we simply don’t know. We do know that these transitions cannot be observed, and that observation has a significant impact on the unknown process. Thus, it is not causal or deterministic on the scale of a single measurement, and we work around the unknown by referring to propensity. In Promise Theory, the presumed dynamical subjects are now 

agents , i.e. encapsulated processes that are localized as a single entity 3. A ‘free’ agent is entirely self-determined. In the absence of influences promised by other agents AND explicitly accepted by itself, an agent’s own promised behaviour is independent of external influence. This reverses the conventional notion that an upstream action causes a downstream outcome, because it leaves the result to the selection of the downstream agent (known as the Downstream Principle [1]). A hard line physicist would perhaps see no contradiction in arguing that that nature has no choice but to obey mathematical rules from outside, while explaining that the selection of a particular outcome is an unknown choice, thus elevating probability and non-locality to something fundamental. In a Promise Theory view, such a choice would be explained by saying that the result of unobservable processes happens within agents, allowing the character of probability to remain unchanged. Of Quantum Mechanics, Schwinger wrote [5]: “By causal 

we mean ... inference in time. Given the state of affairs at one time, the state at another is uniquely determined. What makes it deterministic is that knowledge of the state also determines all phenomena precisely.” Then later, he refers to the dualism of interpretation, with both a wavelike (field) nature and a particle nature to match the limiting classical representation of change: “The field supplies the dynamical agency by which the particle interacts”, which returns to the classical approach. The concept of a state as an internal configuration of agents allows us to assign a probability to that configuration in a repeatable way, just as pure quantum states assign probabilities. A state, in the statistical sense, is a specification of a probability distribution with each observable. The picture of time itself is important to these definitions, and it generally taken for granted. Observationally, each sampling of the system’s state takes a finite amount of time, as specified by the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem. Thus every observation and characterization of a dynamical system corresponds to a coarse grained approximation of the system. The lifetime or persistence of states depends on their scale and is matter of both definition and measurement. While a ‘macro’ or statistical state is a realizable exterior configuration, a single eigenstate from a complete set of spanning functions is an interior configuration. 

> 3In fact, much of quantum mechanics can also be represented this way.

II. P ROMISE THEORY 

From a dynamical systems perspective, a promise is a constraint on an agent’s behaviour. Promise Theory deals with the properties of autonomous agents, i.e. active entities which are, a priori, causally independent of one another. Autonomy is a strong constraint on what is causally possible for agents, since all changes must originate from within the agent until is chooses to accept outside influences. The progressive relaxation of autonomy to allow interaction shapes the behaviours of initially autonomous agents. The fundamental tenet of Promise Theory is that: “No agent may promise anything on behalf of any agent but itself.” . In other words, the last word about all change originates from within the agent. Either an agent decides for itself, or it can veto suggestions from outside. The concept of ‘agency’ is associated with this boundary for influence. One should note that such autonomous agency is a stronger constraint than the Markov condition, which already assumes that events can influence one another. Promise Theory concerns, in large part, how initially au-tonomous agents voluntarily forego their autonomy (without giving it up completely) to cooperate in some process on a scale larger than a single agent. This is sometimes called the formation of a superagent. A promise is a signal concerning the ‘intent’ of an agent to constrain its behaviour in some way. 

Definition 1 (Intent): A form of persistent and coherent behavioural bias, whose residual signal is reflected in a stable probability distribution for times that are long compared to observational events. Notice that—in this view—‘intent’ is not a term reserved for humans or higher animals. It is associated with selection of dynamical variables that guide and shape behaviour. By signalling an intention to another agent, an agent is said to make a promise. A promise is neither a guarantee, nor an obligation. It is merely an autonomous declaration of an intention that may or may not be accurate. 

A. Notation for promises 

The generic label for agents in Promise Theory is Ai, where Latin subscripts i, j, k, . . . numbers distinguishable agents for convenience (these effectively become coordinates for the agents). We shall often use the symbols Si and Rj , instead, for agents to emphasize their roles as source (initiator) and receiver (reactor). So the schematic flow of reasoning is: 1) S offers (+ promises) data. 2) R accepts (- promises) or rejects the data, either in full or in part. 3) R observes and forms an assessment αR(.) of what it receives. An agent assesses all information it receives using a variety of functions for different assessments, depending on its capabilities. Observations and assessments are limited only by the capa-bilities of the agent. They may be economic assessments, to 

> 4

minimize or maximize some parameter. They may be semantic assessments to stay close to a logical or symbolic constraint. Assessments are a centre-point for the indeterminism of agent systems. One should be careful in anthropomorphizing agency too much. We use words like promise, assessment, etc because the convey the correct meaning in the limiting case of complex human agents, but equally assumptions have to be scaled back when being used for simpler agents with limited capabilities. For a molecule, an acceptance of a promise may be equivalent to accepting a donor molecule by docking with it. The elementary agents of a system embody processes , any of which may express promises about state and services. Processes are hosted at agent locations Ai, S i, R i etc. Agents have finite resources, so their capabilities are limited. However, they might over-promise accidentally or deliberately, e.g. promise 10 parking spaces for 20 cars, or 100 seats for 150 passengers. Such a promise can be resolved by time-sharing. i

ω

x

> +expresses feature

Fig. 1: Notation for promise graphs and semantics is fundamentally graphical and (despite a few overlapping concepts) is not equivalent to that for Bayesian networks. 

B. Promise parameterization 

Promise bodies affect only the agent making the promise, but may refer to its intentions towards other agents, e.g.  

> •

A scalar promise refers to no other agents, e.g. I promise to brush my teeth +b. 

> •

A vector promise refers to a single third party, e.g. I promise to follow orders from A3: = b(A3). 

> •

A tensor promise may refer to any number of agents, e.g. I promise to get the best deal from suppliers 

+b(A1, A 2, . . . , A n).Promise also come in two major flavours. An offer promise, written with body +bi made by Si to Rj is written: 

Ai

> +bi

−−→ Aj , (1) where the + refers to an offer of some information or behaviour (e.g. a service). This is a part of Ai’s autonomous behaviour, and the promise constrains only Ai.

Aj may or may not accept this offer, by making a dual 

acceptance promise, marked −b to denote the orientation of intent: 

Aj

> −bj

−−→ Ai. (2) Only if both offer and acceptance promises are kept can an influence be expected to pass from Ai to Aj . In general, the offer and acceptance may not match precisely, in which case the propagated information will be the overlap (mutual information) 

bij = bi ∩ bj , (3) in the manner of mutual information [6], [7]. There is nothing probabilistic yet: this is all assumes to be intentional and attended by best effort. What form does the abstract ±b take? A form of signalling between them may take the form of a language, from regular language all the way up to advanced (human) language [8]. The result of a promise is the assessment of an outcome: 

Definition 2 (Outcome): A distinct event providing a value for a dynamic variable constrained by the promiser. Outcomes form a set, like a menu of possible results, which may be either discrete or continuous. 

C. Conditional promises 

Agents can make promises conditionally. To promise b on receipt of a certain conditional c (e.g. if the book arrives, I will read it by Monday): 

Ai

> +b|c

−−−→ Aj . (4) This notation is distinct from that used in conditional probabil-ities, which has a distinct meaning. Such a conditional offer is not yet a promise. It must be completed by also promising information about the condition. To complete a conditional promise, an agent must also promise the condition to be true (to best effort), i.e. the offer of some conditional c from another upstream agent AC ,

AC

> +c

−−→ Ai (5) must be taken together with the downstream acceptance of c,and since this is purely local, it the downstream must signal its acceptance to Aj and then confirm this even farther downstream to complete its intention to keep the promise [1]: 

Ai

> −c

−−→ AC

Ai

> −c

−−→ Aj (6) Such conditionality is subtle and potentially misleading, as it involves agents as ‘middle men’, which introduces non-deterministic aspects. Agents are not reliable relays in the sense one might expect. A promise that is made subject to a condition is not a complete promise, unless the state of the condition that predicates it has also been promised. It has incomplete information. Such a promise is hence null-potent. If a promise with body S is provided subject to the provision of a pre-requisite promise of body b, then the provision of the pre-requisite by the same agent is completely equivalent to the unconditional promise being made: 

A1

> b|c

−−→ A2 , A 1+c

−−→ A2 ≡ A1

> b

−→ A2 (7) This gives us a rewriting rule for promises made by a single agent in the promise graph. The + is used to emphasize that 

X is being offered, and to contrast this with the next case. Consider now the first case in which one agent assists another in keeping a promise. According to our axioms, an agent can     

> 5promise πevent values observed ACTIONS INTENTIONS OUTCOMES ASSESSMENTS (statistics) not-kept kept (acceptance) AGENT 2 AGENT 1 CONTEXT

Inference - Perception 

> process co-time space sample

Fig. 2: The ‘data pipeline’ in a promised causal influence. An agent promises its own behaviour, i.e. a subset of possible outcomes of its own behaviour. This constrains events associated with the promised behaviour. Another agent, accepting this promise may observe the outcomes, measure and count them, assess whether they keep the promise or not. 

only promise its own behaviour, not that of other agents, thus the promise basically comes from the principal agent, not the assistant, which might not even be known to the final promisee 4.Assistance is a matter of voluntary cooperation on the part of the tertiary agent. There is second case, in which an agent signals its intent to rely on another. If a promise with body b is provided subject to the provision of a pre-requisite promise c by another agent, then the provision of the pre-requisite by an assistant is acceptable if and only if the principal promiser also promises to acquire the prerequisite −c from an assistant (promise labelled −c): 

A1

> b|c

−−→ A2

A1

> −c

−−→ A2

 ∼ A1

> b

−→ A2 (8) In neither case does a conditional promise, or indeed any promise conditional or otherwise, have a certain outcome. It only signals its intent to aim for a best effort outcome. The dynamical uncertainties remain in either case, but may be greater in the latter case of accepting help from a second agent. 

D. Assessment Definition 3 (Assessment): An assessment is an agent’s autonomous act of classifying the outcome of an event with respect to the promises it has received. An assessment can be made by any agent in scope of the promise: both the promiser/sender and the promisee/receiver, as well as third parties, may observe what is happening and make such a determination. 

> 4When a conditional promise is made and quenched by an assistant, the ‘contact’ agent is directly responsible by default. We shall refine this view with alternative semantics later, since this is all a matter of managing the uncertainty of the promise being kept. As soon as we allow rewriting rules of this basic type, it is possible to support multiple solutions for bringing certainty with graded levels of complexity.

An assessment may simply fall into the category of ‘promise kept’ and ‘not kept’, or may be classified into a menu (distribution) of mutually exclusive states ωi that we may refer to as the ‘pure states’ of the promiser. When we write an assessment αa(π) for some agent, the subscript is a reminder that the assessment is made on A’s terms, according to A’s information, on a schedule run by 

A’s clock. Thus it refers to A’s local rate of time and is subject to all possible distortions experienced (either knowingly or unknowingly) by A. This is why we must invoke the downstream principle in all measurements, including those that are the end results of some chain of interactions. Local clock rates may affect local assessments of reliability, errors, or be absorbed into the ‘noise’ of the system. At this stage, everything about the symbolic descriptions refers only to the topology of agents and the semantics of their intentions. This is ‘protocol’. Any dynamics are merely implicit: there is no explicit transactional process or quantitative characterization of the agents in time. The next phase is to describe agent actions. 

E. Spacetime embedding 

The graph of promises between agents forms the spacetime on which behaviour is played out. How agents move or change with respect to one another is an additional layer of description.  

> •

If agents are embedded, like cells in a biological en-vironment, one may add motion to the agents in some embedding space (called motion of the first kind) [9]–[11].  

> •

If agents’ relative positions are fixed or are outside the realm of description, like a solid state, and we only care about what they promise to one another, one may still characterize the flow of information from one agent to another (motion of the second and third kinds) [12]–[14], e.g. supply chains through ports, waves passing through a crystal or a neural network. 

6The advancement of time in a collection of agents suffers from the same complications as relativity in physics. One can choose to adopt a universal time for all agents, according to some outside observer’s clock (the Galilean model). However, autonomous agents have ‘private scope’ (in computer science terminology) or are ‘local’ (in physics terminology). Thus, what one agent experiences as time is based on its own interior dynamics and exterior time is only observed through that lens. This complicates causal determinism in a similar way to the Lorentz-Poincar´ e relativity formulated by Einstein [12]. Probability is an appropriate tool to discuss the quantitative aspects of agent promises: there is an implicit indeterminism to agent interactions, which can be absorbed by a probabilistic description. So to realize a probabilistic description for agents, we must determine what events a promise theoretic system is counting and under what conditions. 

F. Observation and measurement 

Autonomous agents are, by definition, causally independent systems. They observe one another’s promised outcomes, by a process of sampling, based on their own independent clock and resources. By the Nyquist-Shannon sampling law [6], [7], any such process is necessarily non-deterministic, unless every agent can be twice as fast as the one before it (which would be impossible in general). Thus, what one agent promises may not be perceived exactly as intended by the recipient or promisee. When characterizing a probabilistic system, one must, in ad-dition to characterizing a distribution of possible outcomes, say something about the expected invariances of the system. The relying on data alone involves a certain risk that circumstances may, in fact, have changed. Under steady state conditions, one implicitly assumes that what has occurred in the past may be a reliable guide to what may happen again, in the future—which is by no means given. 

G. Scaling of agency and clocks 

A universal characteristic of autonomous agents is that they operate according to their own internal resources and their own internal clocks. The rate at which we observe processes in other agents involves relativity of their individual rates of change. In general we don’t know ‘how fast’ agents react to process events, and we cannot necessarily assume homogeneity amongst agents or their response rates, so there is not always much we can say about the processing rate of autonomous collectives. However, regardless of their individual rates, we can say the following: as several agents and their promises are composed to form a collaborative process (effectively making several agents promise something as a single scaled ‘superagent’), the resulting ‘collective’ promises they make, at their effective superagent boundary, can only be delivered at a rate that is slower than that of any of the individual agents. If an observer Ai samples the results of a promise every 

∆ti time units, then it can never observe any change that happens faster than this. An agent with a finite sampling rate will experience ‘jumps’ in promise outcomes when observing an upstream process that might be smooth according to a faster agent. There are several timescales in competition. Suppose we try to measure all agents according to some universal time, faster than all other agents ∆t. 

> •

The rate at which S keeps its promise π(+)  

> S

: ticks every 

∆tS universal units.  

> •

The rate a which R keeps its promise π(−) 

> R

to accept information: ticks every ∆tR universal units.  

> •

The time it takes for R to assess the outcome of the promise binding: αR(π(−) 

> R

π(+)  

> S

).Now consider a cluster of agents that collaborate in promis-ing a result that is obtained from a series of conditional promises: 

π1(x) 7 → π2(x′|x) 7 → π3(x′′ |x′) 7 → . . . (9) If πi takes ∆ti universal time units to complete, then R’s assessment of the time for the chain to complete must lies somewhere in the range 

max  

> i

∆ti ≤ αR(∆ t1+2+3+ ... ) ≤ X

> i

∆ti, (10) where this range depends on the resolution of the observer’s time. To this, we must add the time to receive and assess as additional uncertainties. We are used to building clocks with simple mechanisms that are fast. However, when we reach atomic scales, all processes occur on a comparable timescale and measurements become less reliable. Measuring the completion time of agents is a basic characteristic for agent systems. When measuring times, we must always specify which agent is measuring the interval, since every autonomous agent has its own clock, running at a rate that depends on its own capabilities and available resources. 

H. Instantaneous and average variables 

An agent’s behaviour is based on interior variables. These are usually unobservable to outside agents unless their values are promised explicitly. Suppose an agent has a set of Ω

such variables that characterize its state. Then any promisable quantity can be represented by some variable xi:

xi =

> D

X

> a=1

wia ωa, (11) where wia is a set of weights and ωa is a basis set of vector ‘features’ that we may call the pure states of the agent. Agents may have additional memory in addition to that which determines its behaviour. Memory may store semantic details, e.g. proper names, acceptable client list such as proteins that the agent allows to dock with receptors, or access control on an E-commerce platform, etc. Agents can learn quantitative average values by sampling data from inside or outside. Moving average values, e.g. the number of clients being serviced at any one time. Obviously an agent cannot collect ‘big data’ to analyze. It has to make do with finite memory. There are two ways of maintaining 

> 7

running averages with a fixed memory allocation. Both require agents to be able to represent real numbers internally. 1) A fixed window for events: Suppose we wish to keep a window of N past events. The agent learns data 

x1, x 2, . . . , x N , where the order is maintained. The average is computed as 

x(N )(t) = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

xi. (12) On each update, the first value (divided by the normalizer 

N ) is dropped and replace ed by a new: 

x(N )(t + 1) = x(N )(t) − x1

N + xN +1 

N . (13) This approach has several disadvantages, especially for elementary agents. It requires a memory size of N values and the ability to perform addition, subtraction, and division! These are not elementary capabilities. 2) Controlled forgetting: The alternative is to use a geo-metric updating procedure that only uses addition [15], [16]. If we define a new expectation operation by this recurrence relation: 

⟨x⟩t+1 = λ ⟨xt⟩ + (1 − λ) xt+1 , (14) where λ ≤ 1, then we now have an average with a policy for forgetting. As this expression is iterated N

times, the oldest values accumulate factors of λN and thus become geometrically less important to the average. Apart from being more computationally efficient, this only uses a single memory representation and can tune its dependence on new information versus old. The variance of the window is simple to calculate in the same way, since the variance is just the average of the square difference: 

σ2 

> t+1

= ⟨(x − ⟨ x⟩t)2⟩t+1 . (15) Thus, even an elementary agent, with little memory, can easily calculate the average and variance of data (though not necessarily the standard deviation, which involves more difficult computation). 

Example 1 (Monitoring software agents): An agent measures a set of features about its runtime environment: ⃗x , whose components are each updated according to eqn (14) with some policy value λi, in general. Typical features are quantities like: percentage CPU usage, memory usage, input/output transfer level, number of clients, etc [16]. 

Example 2 (Sensory data aggregator): An agent promises to receive data from N upstream sensors to form an image ⃗x in a set of discrete samples separated by dead-time ∆t. In order to smooth a persistent image, given that the exact arrival times are unknown, it applies eqn (14) to accumulate running averages that change significantly with new data by choosing a high values of λ for all the sensors. In this way is balances past experience and new experience without risking an empty sensor measurement as a result of poor timing etc. 

I. Thresholds and decision making 

The defining property of an autonomous agent is its ability to reject outside influence and determine its own trajectory. When we attempt to calculate the behaviour of an agent, we have to determine the assessment functions αA(π) of the agent 

A, and the promises it makes and accepts. Elementary agents, i.e. those with few interior degrees of freedom will have little capacity to make decisions to accept or reject influence based on complex criteria, so we can assume they will tend to accept inputs uniformly without modification, to the best of their capabilities; but larger agents such as animals and humans with many interior resources will make much less predictable choices. Even low level agents must satisfy the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem, and be subject to limitations associated with finite resources, so it would be wrong to assume that all machine-level communication is deterministic and without error. Many agents will have developed error correction mechanisms that we take for granted. In reasoning systems, i.e. systems that can discriminate between different classes of behaviour, arbitrary thresholds between the classes must inevitably be used to separate discrete outcomes. There is a finite set of states Ω = {ωi} into which a process naturally classifies a decision.  

> •

The phenomenon may be sufficiently constrained to make these choices clear, e.g. when geometry constrains activity and leads to a discrete set of eigenstates, as in quantum mechanics, or animal varieties based on digital genetics.  

> •

An agent’s finite resources may lead to an arbitrary cut-off, or coarse-graining procedure for value ranges, yielding a set of arbitrary bands, like radio station frequency ranges. To assess behaviour, we need to know how agents’ assessment functions αA(π) are defined. 

Example 3 (Wave propagation through agents): Consider a simple elementary case: a finite linear chain of agents Ai,which promise to inform their neighbours of a real valued displacement function ψ(Ai), where 1 ≤ i ≤ L. The sharing of interior variables is promised as follows: 

Ai

> +ψ(Ai)

−−−−−→ Ai±1 (16) 

Ai±1

> −ψA i

−−−−→ Ai (17) 

αi±1(πi) 7 → ψi (18) and the agent’s interior response to its neighbours is promised by: 

Aiψ7 →ψ+∆ ψ

−−−−−−−→ Ai (19) 

∆ψ = (ψ(Ai±1) − ψ(Ai)) 

m (20) where m ≪ 1. Notice that the symmetrical promising to agents on either side i ± 1 means that the promise graph is an undirected, but totally ordered sequence. The virtual 

> 8

field ψ(Ai) is like a string which can transmit displacements along its length. If we start a simulation with a string plucked at its centre, with ψL/ 2, then the displacement will oscillate away from the centre and spread out, interfering as it reflects back—something like simple harmonic motion. We should note that agents do not obviously obey a conserva-tion of energy as one might expect in physical simple harmonic motion. If the balance of values is maintained precisely, this might be approximated. Indeed, it is extremely difficult to build any kind of conservation laws into agent motion [14]. That is because, by Noether’s theorem, conservation laws are proxies for the smooth continuity of spacetime. In a discrete system, there is no such continuity, even if agents are identical. The system is not really in a dynamic equilibrium; rather it is in an approximate non-equilibrium steady state. Harmonic motion also requires a continuous displacement function, which requires a small increments only, i.e. a small value for m; a discrete set of values will not result in anything like wave motion. A small loss of accuracy causes the motion to overshoot its maximum limit and increase to infinity rather than turn around and come back in the opposite direction. Notice also that there is no need for any normalization of the ψ interior variables. In this example, the spacetime of the agents is totally ordered with no loops. In the case where there are loops, one can explore a similar transmission of an interior variable. 

Example 4 (Eigenvector centrality): A well known char-acteristic of undirected graphs, widely used in sociological analyses, is the eigenvector centrality [17]. Promises form a directed graph as long as each agent accepts its data from its neighbours. In any graph that aggregates data from its neighbours, some neighbours may accumulate more from their neighbours than others. Consider an arbitrary graph of agents formed by promising to share their interior variable ψ(Ai).Since agents have several neighbours, in general, each agent sums the values as before, leading to an effective updating equation 

Aij (π(±))ψ(Ai) 7 → λ ψ (Ai), (21) where the effective adjacency matrix of the graph is the matrix of promises: 

Aij = π(−)(Aj , A i)π(+) (Ai, A j ). (22) This is an eigenvalue equation with a non-negative matrix, and the eigenstate corresponding to its maximum eigenvalue is also non-negative. It represents the eigenvector centrality distribution [17]. The topology of the graph constrains dynamics, leading to a set of eigenstates over the population Ai. In a static graph, this leads to a distribution of ‘wealth’ over the agents that are best connected. However, the matrix equation assumes that there is a dynamic equilibrium for constant Aij , which may not be true for active agents. Stability thus depends on how quickly promises may be changing and whether other promises interfere with the values ψ(Ai).More examples of calculations based on elementary and homogeneous assessment functions may be found in [18]. The difference one must keep in mind as one scales up to more sophisticated agents, with considerable interior degrees of freedom, is that the ability to calculate something meaningful depends on knowing the individual αA(π) functions. Even in the case where there is a single godlike observer AO watching over the agents with a single αO (π), that is not the assessment that drives the dynamics, so one cannot substitute it for the actual one. This is a major obstacle to modelling in promise theory. Finally, even being able to calculate values for interior variables, the final outcome depends on what agents choose to select. Evolution and selection are both at work in promise graphs. When approaching promise theoretic agents quantitatively, the goal is not merely to turn it into something like a classical physics problem, but rather to take into account the special semantics of agency. What does knowing a function like 

ψ(Ai) actually tell us about the function of a collection of agents? What do the quantitative changes mean, in the context of the problem. We must therefore turn to look into the characterization of class discrimination. 

J. Philosophical note 

In their efforts to explain phenomena, early natural philoso-phers began by postulating mechanical forces and potentials 

to drive downstream behaviour deterministically. In Promise Theory parlance, a deterministic driving force would correspond to an imposition , i.e. an attempt to induce cooperation, without a prior invitation. This is a deontic explanation, framing change as an obligation or a command that must be obeyed 5. On an elementary level, one does not expect to need an invitation to propose a change, yet—viewed in another way—this is what charges and contact forces actually conceal. For an autonomous agent, upstream determinism violates the basic premise of local downstream self-determination [1]. In Promise Theory, a downstream agent has no obligation to be affected by an upstream signal (though it may still promise to do so). In other words, F = ma does not refer to a non-ignorable force, but rather to a willing recipient. Modern accounts of change often prefer statistical formu-lations, owing to the observed complexity of phenomena. The attitude to causal determinism also changed with the discovery of quantum mechanics, and non-linear systems, where downstream causation could not be determined with certainty. However, rather than abandon the notion of upstream imposition altogether, quantum mechanics invokes a mystical aspect to the theory rather than abandon the concept of force (source) and response. In quantum field theory, one works around this with explicit models of messenger particles or fields that signal force through probabilistic absorption. In either case, one effectively sidesteps the idea of upstream authority to force change on downstream agents, and the behaviour of autonomous agents is similar to behaviours seen in quantum mechanics for this reason. 

> 5This Western scientific view probably has its origins in religious authority.
> 9

The purpose of Promise Theory then is to represent the dynamics and semantic behaviours of agents together, gener-alizing the specific models used in physics or biology. The purpose of comparing it to other theoretical frameworks is to bridge a gulf of understanding to more familiar tools, including probability. In Promise Theory, the semantics of influence may still be found in familiar concepts, now reframed as promisable intentions.  

> •

For a downstream offer, π(+) : propensity, impulse, poten-tial, force, charge, influence.  

> •

For a downstream acceptance, π(−): affinity, permeability, responsiveness, plasticity, pliability, (vs resistance, inertia). The distinction is that all responses ultimately come from within an agent. Large scale forces and potentials may still represent a form of memory of accumulated promise responses. Why do we need another theoretical framework? The simple answer is that we have specific models, which fail to recognize each other’s similarities, while generic probability is incomplete with respect to semantics and dynamics. By choosing a bespoke language to unify semantics and dynamics, we hope to restore some of the explanatory details that probabilistic descriptions make ambiguous 6.III. P ROBABILITY 

Given an unpredictable phenomenon, many researchers will rush for the toolbox of statistics and probability to model it. Superficially, this sounds like an obvious choice, but it is not without its pitfalls. Turning a phenomenon into a story about probability may introduce unnecessary abstraction, and ultimately involve ambiguity about causal information. Probability theory calculates profiles of the relative likelihood of alternative outcomes, by counting events from a process that has either already happened or which may be in the process of happening. Profiles are represented formally as sets. Events arise as measurements within the observational process. However, in advanced uses to probability, events are abstracted to represent hypotheses, contexts, and even theoretical models. Whereas probability describes events, Promise Theory prin-cipally describes the constraints on agents. Thus a probability refers to a snapshot of a process, while promises describe possible or ‘intended’ trajectories. One of the natural uses for promise theoretic probability, in a learning sense, is to assess what an agent is doing and try to infer what it may have promised, which is something like the question of inferring ‘laws of nature’ on the basis of repeated behaviour. Possible events are counted by an observer over some number of repeated process or sequence of N trials. Trials may be of any size. To characterize a process, we need to know enough about it to know all of the possible alternative outcomes it may exhibit. We then begin by forming a basis of spanning sets, and 

> 6The statistical methods of the natural sciences are attached to a pantheon of already-reserved semantics associated with standardized phenomena. This is a party to which artificial systems are often not invited: dynamically similar phenomena do not always mix as friends. Promise Theory establishes a tailored language without a specific territory.

count events with similar characteristics. The dimensionless ratio pi of sample size to total size is the measure of the importance or relative standing of a specific occurrence that we refer to as probability. If we are counting past events as an invariant frequency profile, then N is assumed to be large in order to achieve greater ‘objective’ certainty. In a frequentist treatment, trials are assumed to be performed ‘in parallel’, i.e. independently of one another and under equivalent conditions. Trials may be called space-like separated and time is unimportant. The result has the semantics of a controlled expectation, whose accuracy is based on the size of N .A Bayesian trial, by contrast, is taken in a time-like sequence, in which the conditions of the experiment may be changing slowly, and we are trying to update our estimate in some semi-controlled fashion (see figure 3). There is no built-in accuracy in this approach. One speaks of changing ‘beliefs’ rather than invariant frequencies. The utility of the result depends on the integrity of the process one is modelling rather than the method. time space ensembles sequential cognition 

> Frequentist interpretation Bayesian interpretation

Fig. 3: Probability trials and ensembles. In a frequentist interpreta-tion, trial ensembles are effectively space-like separated snapshots (transverse variation), whereas a Bayesian samples are ordered by a conditional precedence relation and thus represent time-like snapshots (longitudinal variation). 

The logic of a Bayesian probabilistic reasoning quickly becomes maddeningly complicated when trying to adjust fair but approximate estimates about different outcomes likelihoods, on the arrival of new evidence (given that such estimates are already uncertain) in order to minimize the risk of making particular inferences. The following sections provide a brief review. 

A. Axioms 

Formally, any kind of probability reduces to studying the function P (ea|eb), where ea and eb are events, and the function represents the probability of event ea’s occurrence given the conditions implies by event eb [19], [20]. It is built on a few axioms and related results: 

1. 0 ≤ P (ea|| eb) ≤ 1 (23) 

2. P (ea|| ea) = 1 (24) 

3. P (¬ea|| eb) = 1 − P (ea|| eb) (25) 

4. P (ea ∩ eb|| ec) = P (ea|| ec) P (eb|| ea ∩ ec) (26) 

10 aA = { e } B = {e } bFig. 4: Two sets formed from collections of events A = {ea} and    

> B={eb}, and their overlap region A∩B. We note that the overlap region double counts coincident events.

where ¬ea means NOT ea, ea ∩ eb means ea AND eb

(conjunction), and ea ∪ eb means ea OR eb (disjunction). From these, we note that counting all elements in both sets must be corrected from double-counting the overlap region: 

P (ea ∪ eb|| ec) = P (ea|| ec) + P (eb|| ec) − P (ea ∩ eb|| ec). (27) Moreover, if P (ea ∩ eb|| C) = 0 , events ea and eb are said to be independent, or mutually exclusive on the condition C. For independent events 

P (ea ∩ eb|| ec) = P (ea|| ec) P (eb|| ec). (28) Deciding whether or not sets overlap and by how much turns out to be harder than one might think. I depends on the definitions of the sets (i.e. the invariants one has established), and having clear definitions is sometimes a challenge that is not always met with due care. The subtle hurdle for probability lies in the problem of nor-malization . How can non-local distributions over many agents be described by normalized functions that rely on information they have no access to. Agents do not typically know how many other agents are in the system: thus normalization is a transformation performed by an aggregator and is not known to the system itself. 

B. Scale free and dimensionless 

Events form sets ea ∈ { e1, e 2, . . . , e D } that may grow or shrink over time as sequences of events arrive or are consumed by some process [21]. Each event adds one of D different sets of alternatives, where D is assumed constant. Given a number of arrivals, after a certain sampling time, one forms a dimensionless ratio: 

P (ea) = N (ea)

N (29) 

N = X

> a

N (ea). (30) By dividing by the sample size N , in the denominator, one ‘normalizes’ the values relative to the sample size, and thus the probability is independent of its sample size. It is now a matter of ‘trust’ that the ratio refers to a sufficiently large sample to form a meaningful distinction. We’ll come back to this issue, since trust in probability is an important concern, and it has a specific meaning in Promise Theory. In Bayesian thinking, one seldom writes simply P (ea),which implies an invariant property, since it tells us little about the conditions under which the counting was done. Rather, one may write: 

P (ea|| C) = N (ea|| C)

P 

> a

N (ea|| C) , (31) where P (ea|| C) refers to a specific context or scenario C,rather than a universally assumed phenomenon. Form this we can test hypotheses by interpreting this as a matter of inductive inference, in a Bayesian interpretation of data collection. Thus 

ea and C are now propositions and P (ea|| C) is the degree of belief in ea given that C is assumed true. The price for this generalization is an implicit extension of the sample space to include a set of all contexts, of which C is a member. This can often be hand-waved away, but one must be clear about the consequences of such handwaving. In the context of a system of agents, where each agent learns a different part of the observational picture, the challenge is to integrate these different fragments into a meaningful whole. Normalization is one such challenge. Since a dimensionless ratio retains no explicit information about the total size of the sample, probabilities have the appearance of being scale free. However, this is misleading, since the accuracy of the result may still depend on the sample size in the denominator, and convergence to an accurate value is also an assumption about the asymptotic behaviour of the process being measured. Since there exist stochastic processes that never converge, such as unconstrained maximum entropy processes, a given probability may not be an accurate guide to behaviour at all. Knowledge of the normalizing denominator is often the challenge to be overcome in calculating probability, especially as the numbers change in response to new measurements. An obvious quantitative question to ask is: how long does it take to establish stable probabilistic significance? Identifying the appropriate timescale for a phenomenon is a key starting point. 

C. Observables: event semantics 

The set of observables forms a spectrum of labels a, b, . . . ,which encode the ‘semantics’ expressed by observational events 

ea. The allowed observables form a set ΩE = {ω1, ω 2, . . . ω D },and D = dim Ω E , called the sample space. This is assumed to be invariant. However, we can also consider multiple (assumed parallel) processes with different sample spaces and combine them to form a single larger system. This is how probability becomes grounded with contextual conditional arguments. Associated with each event is a model of perception that the observer associates with the semantics of the event. The notation ⃗x a is associated with the vector of features associated with event ea. 

> •

In a physical experiment, dynamical variables may be associated with a relatively small number of focused degrees of freedom, which can be modelled on theoretical principles.  

> 11 •

In modern machine learning models, feature vectors may have billions of parameters. The larger the number of features, the harder it becomes distinguish a selection by probability alone, and thus potentially to argue a causal connection.The amount of data needed to discriminate alternatives is roughly proportional to the dimension of this feature vector. With insufficient data, one risks obtaining just a few samples for edge cases. There is often a trade-off between semantic precision and available data. In the case where one believes that processes exhibit longitudinal patterns, sample events can be combined into sequences (sequences of DNA, sequences of words, etc), which are believed to have repeatable significance, thus forming a ‘combined event’. Short combinatoric sequences of features may then be used to increase the resolution of pattern recognition, at the expense of exponentially fewer occurrences. The distribution of repeated sequences tends to form a power law as a function of length [22]. 

D. Event dynamics: the role of time 

Promise Theory can make use of probabilistic concepts, and so we must seek to lay out that programme in a coherent way. Promises refer to the space of semantics, or intended behaviours , which include the classified behaviours expressed by a probability sample space ΩE . They also go beyond these to express the context of the process and extra-agent information such as why such events are occurring. Promises thus establish a criterion or a ‘guiderail’ for future outcomes. Agent  

> interior dynamics exterior dynamics +promise offer +offer acceptance

Fig. 5: Quantitative descriptions of promises may refer to interior dynamics, involved in keeping promises, or exterior dynamics involved in propagation of influence between agents. 

If a dynamic variable cannot be predicted causally, one may still ask: can its probable or average value at least be made approximately causal? This is where statistics and probability help to give a formally precise algorithm for describing what may be inferred, while actually remaining approximate. The time snapshot picture of Bayesian probability suggests that we form a strategy of separating variables into fast fluctuations and slow (approximately constant or quasi-static) snapshots: 

q(t) = ⟨q(tslow )⟩ + δq (tfast ), (32) in which we characterize a slow envelope of change by a running expectation value ⟨q(t)⟩ = 1∆t

R t+∆ tt dt p aqa(t), and a faster fluctuation part δq (t) as representing a ‘stochastic process’ (meaning one we have given up trying to explain and we now take on trust to be modelled by a probability distribution). Such slowly varying averages cannot be at perfect equilibrium, but they may form persistent or approximately steady states, so the tools of non-equilibrium effective theories are in play, and energy conservation and other dynamical book keeping variables may not be relied upon. As we move from differential representation to a probabilistic description, forces turn into outcomes, and rates of change turn into the probability of a transitional change occurring. charge × potential 7 → probability × effect (33) time derivative ∂∂t 7 → probability × timescale . (34) This change of representation often happens without much fanfare or explanation. 

E. Discrimination by coincidence: jointly observed events 

The probability that ea happens together with eb within a given sample is represented by the joint probability: 

P (ea, e b) = P (ea∩eb) (35) 

= N (ea ∩ eb)

Ntot 

. (36) 

N (ea∩e′

> b

) means the number of trials in which ea AND e′ 

> b

are observed together. One should remember that the a and b trials do not have to run over the same set of outcomes, e.g. two sensors might sample cars of the same type at different locations (same sample space for each independent measurement), or two sensors in the same location might measure type and colour (different sample spaces for the independent measurements). This is the same concept as the logical conjuction AND, but a glib treatment easily conceals the nature of the process by which the counting is done, which is potentially confusing. Temporal arrangement is important to the causal indepen-dence of events. If, in a single measurement, the two samples are taken from different sources, i.e. a sample has events of two independent processes occurring within a single frame of measurement, where a frame may be space-like or time-like separated, then P (ea, e b) = P (ea∩eb) = P (ea)P (eb).If however, the events were taken from the same source in the same time-frame, one after the other then we must write 

P (ea, e b) = P (ea∩eb) = P (ea|| eb)P (eb)7.The joint probability P (ea, e ′

> b

) is the probability that events 

ea and e′ 

> b

occur together, i.e. “simultaneously” for all intents and purposes with respect to the trials. These measurements would refer to different processes, i.e. measurements of different aspects of a system of many possible aspects. For example, a joint probability for what the left eye and right eyes see at the same time. For completeness of the observable sets, it follows that one can always obtain the probability of each event alone       

> 7The question of whether the events eaand ebbelong to the same set is confusing. Regardless of the nature of the values representing the events ea
> and eb, simultaneous independent events form different sets (which may still overlap). If, however, the events are from the same source, they are a single set.

12 by summing over all possible outcomes for the other, resulting in the ‘marginal’ probability (a particularly unhelpful name): 

P (ea) =

> Db

X

> b=1

P (ea, e ′

> b

) (37) e.g. = P (ea, e ′

> b

) + P (ea, ¬e′

> b

) (38) where b = 1 . . . D b, and ¬e′ 

> b

is the complement of e′

> b

, or colloquially meaning ‘NOT e′

> b

’. Problems and confusions abound when measures that are assumed to be invariant are assumed to be representable by probabilities. Taken together, joint observations have consistent sample space, which is the product space of the sample spaces. This is consistent as long as every observer has the same sampling capabilities. A colour blind observer would not register the same outcomes as one with perfect colour vision, for instance. This tells us that we must carefully control what different agents interpret about each others’ data. Coincidence is also the phenomenon behind co-activation, in which an inference depends on two things happening together. This is the basis for Hebbian learning [23]. 

F. Conditional events and reasoning in sequences 

If, within a single trial, the selection of a second event from a sample space is affected by the selection of a preceding first event, then the probability of selecting the latter event is said to be conditional on the first. He result is an association between the two 

P (value || key ), (39) like a ‘directory’ or ‘lookup table’ for key-value pairs, in which the value is the likelihood for different associations. In terms of semantics, we could visualize a process of learning and updating such associative beliefs as a result of observation as a process of correcting a telephone directory or a table of sines and logarithms, based on observing discrepancies. The owner of the book updates the values by making notes in the original trained data [24]. As Pearl notes [20], discussions of probabilities P (A|| B) = 

p have very different semantics than the more common logical notion of reasoning IF B THEN A, with likelihood p. The latter favours an optimistic view: it is a policy to institute 

A under some threshold of evidence about B. The former conditional probability implies no policy; it only measures a degree of evidence for certain inferences to be made about A

given an observation of B. This semantic gap is also the familiar deficiency levelled at semantic knowledge graphs, which focus on assessed importance rather than weight of evidence. We abstract this into a story about random events as follows. If two events are observed simultaneously, we can interpret this as one given that the other is also present. If we know for certain that one of the events is present, then we can reduce the overlap sample space so that the probability is increased by removing the alternatives we know to be false. This is written with vertical bars ‘ || ’, thus the probability of ea given eb:

P (ea|| e′

> b

) = P (ea, e ′

> b

)

P (e′

> b

) = P (ea∩e′

> b

)

P (e′

> b

) . (40) A conditional dependence suggests that e′ 

> b

must happen before 

ea, which hints at causation. However, it is not necessarily enough to determine causation: that depends on what the events represent, and thus it requires a semantic determination, not merely a potentially misleading notation. Moreover, the assumed condition is symmetrical: 

P (ea, e ′

> b

) = P (ea|| e′

> b

)P (eb) = P (e′

> b

|| ea)P (ea). (41) This is because we have already assumed that both are present in the overlap region by virtue of P (ea, e b) being non-zero. Thus, there is no implicit order to these events in this formalism. They are simultaneous. By combining this with (37), we sum to obtain 

P (ea) =

> D′

X

> b=1

P (ea|| e′

> b

) P (e′

> b

). (42) 

P (e′

> b

) =

> D

X

> a=1

P (e′

> b

|| ea) P (ea). (43) From this symmetry, combining (40) with (43), we have Bayes Theorem and the basis of Bayesian methodology: 

P (ea|| e′

> b

) = P (e′

> b

|| ea)P (ea)

PDb=1 P (e′

> b

|| eb) P (eb) . (44) Instead of interpreting this as about joint, simultaneous mea-surement events, Bayesian methodologists often abstract the second variable e′ 

> b

to represent a different kind of set: a set that describes a ‘context’ for the measurement, i.e. a state referring to a new frame in a process of discovery, as a state of knowledge in a model or hypothesis to be refined. A context is still an event, but now it attains a higher significance as a trigger event that explains the first event, by attaching to it with a some probability. Our task is then to find which possible associated event correctly identifies its partner event 8.Relabelling (40) 

P (posterior ) = P (e|H)P (H)

P (e) (45) 

= P (x|ωi)P (ωi)

P (x) (46) 

= Likelihood Evidence P (Prior ). (47) where the roles played by the terms are used, liberally, to mean evidence e for a hypothesis H, or equivalently some feature attribute vector ⃗x associated with a classification of a ‘state of the world’ ωi. The terms are colloquially referred to as follows:  

> •

Prior P (H)or P (ωi): the probability of each hypothesized classification occurring, without qualification, from all prior experience. This is a distribution over states ωi that we are trying to determine by measuring new scenarios.  

> •

Likelihood P (e|H) or P (⃗x|ω i): the probability distribu-tion, all else being equal, that the classification H or ωi is 

> 8Not that this could be a possible cause, but could also just be a consequence of some other causal explanation.
> 13

associated with the event e or feature x. This is evidence about the properties of different events.  

> •

Evidence P (e): the relative prevalence of a particular kind of event e amongst all events, which is independent of the hypothesis and so plays a minor normalizing role.  

> •

Posterior P (H|e): the generator of decisions, i.e. the probability that the given hypothesis or state of the world is H, given that we measured an event e.The event e (or its measured feature attribute x) is now a pointer to a frame of evidence (quickly varying measurement), updated in sequence to refine a model hypothesis H (slowly varying and converging). P (e|H) is viewed as the probability of an event e occurring in the context of H. If we start out with some prior estimate for H, as a frequency distribution, that each new point refines. The refined estimate of P (H)

now maps to a ‘causally’ updated quantity P (H|e), which is formally downstream of e.One may thus define a probability of some outcome relative to a model P (e|M ), in which the outcome e ranges over a number of possible values, and M is an entirely different kind of object to e, perhaps one that cannot even be enumerated. By writing M like this, we denote the existence of a set of events (in which the model is true and not true) as a dependency. In order to make sense, the model has to be an invariant. 

Example 5 (Inference of intent): Could we, observing over time, infer the intention behind the behaviours of another agent, in the absence of a promise? Or could one establish that the agent’s promise is deliberately deceptive? Is the agent lying? Lying needn’t be a human trait. Animals that mimic one another often lie in nature. Looking like a poisonous insect in order to ward off predators is a lie, with respect to the acceptance promise that a predator is attuned to. A virus lies to a cell receptor in order to reprogram the cell for its own intent. 

G. Sequential updating of estimates 

The Bayes formula is suitable for iterating over a sequence of incoming events with features x. On the arrival of the n+1 th event, our belief in the model hypothesis would be updated to: 

P n+1 (H) ≡ P (H|| e1, . . . e n+1 ) (48) 

= P (en+1 || H, e 1, . . . , e n) P (H|e1, . . . e n)

P (en+1 || e1, . . . , e n)

(49) Thus one bends the meaning of data to express a form of quasi-causal inference. This involves some complications for continuous streams of data [25]. The schema of the model is the set of pure states, ωi. It doesn’t change very often or very fast, assuming that the initial training data D, which may be a set of topics per chapter in a book, or table of logarithms for the schema that forms the basis set i, spanning intermediate events wi.

P (x0|x, D ) = X

> i

P (x0|| x, w i) P (wi|| D) (50) Each round effectively updates D as well as updating x0,through the intermediate values wi, for the schema of pure states labelled by i.training data (first edition) p(w | D) lookup of schema w based on D copy editing (corrections) observe new corrected w    

> (upstream) (downstream)
> initial prior new observation posterior lookup
> p( D | correct w)

Fig. 6: Semantically, the corrective pipeline in a Bayesian learning process is a bit like copy editing a lookup-table or information directory. One starts with a “first edition” or training set of data, then one enters into a copy editing phase of updating the text observation by observation. The schema of attributes associated with each value(key) is approximately constant, but the values w are random events. What is a key and what is a value seem to change places/roles as we proceed to correct items that are already in the directory. 

Finally, eliminating a co-occurrence (coincidence of at-tributes) involves summing out the intermediate states: a conditional probability with two dependencies (co-activation) becomes conditional on a single variable, 

P (e|| eb) = X

> c

P (e|| eb, e c)P (eb|| ec), (51) for example, where ec takes on the role of a context, chapter heading or other classification variable. 

Example 6 (Controlled forgetting (again)): If we return to the section ( II-H ) using the controlled forgetting policy 

λi to represent the controlled learning (with complementary forgetting), 

x(t + 1) = λx (t + 1) + (1 − λ)x(t) (52) we can equivalently couch this in Bayesian terms by dividing the variable x up into a set of class ranges ωi, so that the probability we learn over the course of tracing the development of an agent over N data samples is pi = N (ωi)/N . This decomposition is an extra step in the calculation. We can now write x = P 

> i

xiωi, like a vector over the spectral decomposition, so that: 

x ≡ X

> i

pixi. (53) Notice that the normalization N is now formally changing with time. However, suppose we start with some initial idea about the value of pi(t = 0) and call this our prior estimate 

P (x): then the Bayes rule says: 

P (x(t + 1) || xi) = P (xi|| x(t)) P (x(t)) 

P (xi) (54) So the original equation (52) is now transformed into a problem of updating the expectation value (divided into classes) by altering the probability rather than by updating the value directly. This indirection is not useful in this case, but it 

14 illustrates how we can shift the dynamics from one view to another 9. Now we let 

x(t + 1) = X

> i

pi(t + 1) xi, (55) 

x(t) = X

> i

pi(t) xi, (56) 

pi(t) = Pi(x). (57) so that X

> i

pi(t)xi = λx j + (1 − λ) X

> k

pk(t)xk, (58) and comparing coefficients of xi:

pi(t + 1) = λδ ij + (1 − λ) pi (59) 

=

 λpi

δij + (1 − λ)



pi(t). (60) and therefore P (x|| x)/p (xi) 7 →

 λpi δij + (1 − λ)



. Although we can formulate problems in a Bayesian manner, there is no advantage to doing so unless we believe there are solid grounds for separating the dynamics of a probability distribution from the variable value itself. The price for doing so is that i) the formulation is more complicated than a simple convex updating, and ii) we are now using probability more like a dimensionless potential function than as a normalized ratio linked to statistics. Interior probability might be an effective representation of an underlying dynamical process, that allows us to invoke general arguments about optimization, based on entropy for example, particularly when we can’t inspect variables directly. We hope to know as much as possible, and therefore try to minimize uncertainty or invoke optimization schemes; however, one should always keep in mind that knowing an accurate probability for some change is not the same as having an explanation for the phenomenon. 

H. Generalized stochastic systems 

If it indeed makes sense to separate the evolution of probabilities from other dynamic variables, as it does in quantum mechanics for example, then one may try to model the time evolution of a system directly as a probability: 

dp (x, t )

dt = f (x, t ). (61) An equation of this form expresses the evolution of a distribu-tion p(x) 7 → p(x, t ) as it is updated by some hidden underlying processes. What generates a time dependent change in a probability, physically? The Bayesian update rule in (47) gives some clues: there are three parts that could figure in such a change: estimates about the nature of the process, independent changes to the population itself, or to the experiment, the normalization etc. 

> 9This is somewhat analogous to the moving of time dependence in the Schr¨ odinger versus Heisenberg representations.

Making this inference is ultimately similar to making inferences about agent’s intent from bulk statistical evidence, i.e. from causal bias. We have to be aware that this model of time dependent prob-ability may be our own fiction, constructed by an enthusiastic abstraction, rather than a true reflection of the interior degrees of freedom of the agents concerned. On a practical level, one can study equations for the time development of probability simply by making it a function of time, as in (61). So-called master equations are such examples include the Lindblad and Redfield master equations, which are approximations to non equilibrium steady state processes in quantum systems. The Langevin equation and Wiener processes are associated with stochastic motion [21], [26], [27]. Stochastic equations are, however, necessarily idealizations on a number of levels. The evolution of a statistical distribution as a function of time involves changes to populations on an average scale, which in turn implies that what we are calling 

time is itself now a coarse grained variable, which is not the fundamental unit of change 10 .

I. Semantics of autonomous pipelines 

We should not assume coherent behaviour from a collection autonomous agents, without first setting up the conditions for cooperative order throughout the collective. Bypassing autonomy exacts a price. Suppose data from autonomous agents are collected by sampling along a pipeline from a source to a receiver. In the absence of a promise from some upstream agent, a downstream agent only has access to its own interior variables: data collection needs to secure access to data by a promise from the source, where data resides, to an agent that will aggregate, calibrate, and compute results. For the sake of probability, agents’ promises can be treated as independent variables, as an ensemble, or as a number of trials, etc. Data arrive at effectively random intervals, on a voluntary basis, as each agent operates on its own schedule (according to its own clock) and with its own rate of change. By the receiver, data do not arrive marshalled into neat comparable batches, suitable for training, as probability textbooks assume. The downstream principle applies to aggregators too (see figure 7). Suppose we want a trusted data set x1, x 2, . . . x D , to arrive as a set of events. In Promise Theory, there are several prerequisites for this to happen: two promises must be kept and an assessment must be completed. Reliable agents interactions involve promise bindings of offer 

(+) and acceptance (−) to data pass from one agent to another. The source of data must be identified: do the data values come from a single agent or from multiple agents. Suppose each data value comes from a different agent Si, i = 1 , 2, . . . , N (Si),and that a single aggregator or receiver agent R will collect         

> 10 The same criticism can be applied to quantum equations of motion, which involve several inconsistent semantic assumptions about time.
> 15 SSR+x +x ...
> 12
> -x
> 112
> -x 2
> x (t) 1
> x1(t’)
> ...
> x1(t’’’)
> 2
> x (t) x2(t’) x2(t’’’)
> ωωp ( |)p ( |)xx12

Fig. 7: Over a number of independent agents, there are potentially many independent parameters to capture behaviour. One must not assume coherence of sources without promises that enable coherence to form, and we should be aware of how values are normalized autonomously. 

data and calculate statistical results. Each source must promise access to its variables: 

πi(Si) : Si

> +xi

−−→ R, (62) similarly, R must promise to accept all such values faithfully without truncating or rejecting certain values: 

πR(R) : R −xR

−−−→ Si (63) where xR∩xi = xi. The receiver R treats each data arrival as an event ea(Si) = xi and forms an assessment of the value 

αR(xa), which is the data value it perceives from the source. It can now compute an average value from all its sources Si:

x = 1

N (Si) 

> N(Si)

X

> a=1

αR(xa). (64) We’ve assumed that R only collects one such value from each 

Si over the course of this calculation, so some synchronization is involved. 

J. Aggregation, confluence 

The foregoing steps were entirely in the domain of a single agent’s promises. Going further, we can allow a receiver R

to collect multiple data variables, from each source Si, and categorize the value into class buckets ωa, which could also be different for each source agent: ωa(Si); thus counting several events ea(Si) from each source in order to form a probability mass or density function for each agent separately 

pi(xa|ωb(Si)) . (65) The receiver can independently promise to calibrate the classes from each source leaving a simpler result pi(xa|ωb) which represents the variation in behaviours from a single agent, and thus a single variable over multiple trials (over time). This assumes the addition of several new promises, however. The probability of events, in a Promise Theory framework, is thus really the probability of an agent forming a certain assessment after establishing a process between them. 

PSR 



αR



π(−) 

> R

| π(+) 

> S



|| π(+)  

> S

, π (−)

> R



(66) Although there is only a single probability data event, this is not a single event of agent actions, but a cluster. In this sense, both promises acts like event contexts or model hypotheses in the Bayesian sense, which may or may not be present before the events are measured by R. Notice that this version of the conditional probability depends only on R’s downstream assessment and its rate of change. Thus the agent 

R (downstream) is our sole lens for what is measured. Finally, we should also bear in mind that, in a non-deterministic world, with possibly unreliable agents, it is perfectly possible for events to occur that have not been promised. In this case, they are a ‘surprise’ to the receiver. The receiver has the responsibility to marshal events into a consistent timeline [28]. What happens for a single agent interaction, in isolation, makes no reference to whatever encumbrances it may have as a result of promising to other agents. If an agent has to keep other promises at the same time, with finite resources, this may affect its ability to keep that promise. Thus, when we put an agent in a network of promises, this might exclude certain options in its sample space Ω.Pursuing an analogy with quantum mechanics, it’s natural to ask whether we might calculate the pure states of a constrained agent involved in some collective system, based on boundary conditions (see also section IV). Unlike quantum mechanics, this will not be a geometrical constraint over spacetime that leads to a basis set of supportable eigenfunctions. Where more complex semantics dominate, with a graph topology, geometry takes a back seat and other process based criteria take the lead in deciding what is allowed. For example, in a biological cell, what can be promised is based on biogenetic processes which are the result of molecular bindings. 

K. Steady state behaviours 

When promises are static, i.e. independent of time over some epoch, then agents may be said to be operating under steady state conditions. Since a promise has the status of a constraint on the behaviour of the promiser, i.e. a causal prerequisite for events associated with keeping to some condition, we want to write expressions like the following for an agent A:

P (event ei(A) || promise π(A)) , (67) where the agent’s usual events and its promises are different classes of happenings. From the foregoing discussion it should be clear that promises signal an active intent to act, whereas a conditional probability is an entirely passive observational condition; it does not imply a causal order. Probabilistically, then, a promise must be represented as a complementary set of mandatory preliminary events, before the events an agent produces as output to keep the promise, where the promise labels are new, independent basis elements. We thus extend the sample space to account for the existence or non-existence of constraining promises: 

Ω( A) 7 → { ea} ⊗ { π(±)1 , ¬π(±)1 } ⊗ . . . (68) 

> 16

for all promises (see figure 8). A similar extension applies to both the sender/promiser (+) 

and the receiver/promisee (−) agents. In this sense, promises complicate the classification of an agent’s state. It is no longer simply a stochastic system with random behaviour, but something more like a quantum system with a basis set of specific outcomes that we hope to represent somehow. To a first approximation, one could simply count the downstream assessment as a single event. e

π

events promises sample space 

Fig. 8: In a promise based system, the sample space is formally enlarged to accommodate promise events that live alongside the pure states of the agent’s dynamical activity. 

More accurately, for each agent independently, Bayes scaling formula (47) can now be written in the form: 

P (π || ea) = P (ea || π)P (π)

P (ea) , (69) where π is a promise, which is now used as a classifying conditional, and ea is an event generated by the promiser and observed by any observing agent. Reading between the lines, we understand these probabilities to be assessments αR(ea),

αR(π), etc, made by some observer R, at the end of a data pipeline. The Bayesian contributions are then:  

> •

The probability distribution of an observer’s assessment that the promiser is keeping its promise P (ea || π), given observational data ea, may be taken to be proportional to its prior estimate that the promiser would do ea given that the promise π was made.  

> •

The probability of the condition that the promise was given, 

P (π), is either 1 or 0 if the agent is known; however, if we are guessing amongst a population of unfamiliar agents our estimate of how many have made a promise may be any number between 0 and 1.  

> •

The probability P (ea) that an agent might do ea uncon-ditionally (irrespective of whether it has promised or not), may also be guessed from data or assumptions about a population. This is the usual Bayesian handwaving. If we are looking at propagation of influence , along some path, then at each transition we are really looking for the probability of a promise binding resulting in a shared event 

as in (69), which includes a downstream assessment to accept this behaviour by promisee R, given that it was offered by S

(see section III-O ). Moreover, the probability of this unilateral assessment by R is conditional on the joint event of both the promises being present. 

L. Non-steady state behaviours 

Abrupt piecewise changes to a promise can be dealt with piece by piece. When an agent’s promises change slowly with time π(t), we might not be able to say much about the behaviour without a detailed interior knowledge of agents, but we can look to non-equilibrium physics for inspiration. Promise changes would normally be slow, so that a separation of variables can be performed to identify a series of epochs over which promises are approximately constant. The probabilistic snapshots, P (t|| π), will then lag behind those changes, by hysteresis, owing time is takes to offer, accept, and assess, as well as collect probabilistic assessments on the coarse grained timescale of the averages. The pure states of our system are, of course, the unique (non-degenerate, inequivalent) configurations of the system, satisfying the promise constraints. The status of a promise change is more like a change in boundary conditions than a change of state. If a promise body contains variable parameters, the magnitude of a promised service might adjust slowly, but semantic changes to promises are rarely smooth differentiable gradients. While it is not impossible for agents to step up or step down activities in a controlled manner, promises are more likely to appear and disappear instantaneously as events. As a calculated propensity, such a change could be imple-mented as a time dependent probability. However if we try to interpret probability over growing data sets, we are likely to run into trouble: the conditions are no longer invariant. As data streams grow in total size, results may converge either to certainty or simply noise, depending on the sensitivity. The alternative approach is to make use of the forgetting rate policy in section II-H , where possible. If a probability and its sample space are not based on invariants, then its interpretation is thrown into doubt [15], [16], [25]. Following [25], one might approximate with a factorized solution method over the independent agents. Then, approxi-mation techniques like master equations might also be applied, in the case where one could separate a interior Hamiltonian evolution of the agent from a set of states associated with external systems (see section IV). In order to apply the kind of highly constrained evolution implied by a master equation, one would have to identify all the pure states of each agent, and then a set of separable jump operators. The major challenge, in all scenarios, remains the lack of homogeneity between agents. Agent chemistry, in practice, is often closer to molecular chemistry than to a homogeneous thermodynamic material. Computer simulation is the obvious choice for agent dynamics. 

> 17

M. Weighted pathways as intentions: trajectories and stories 

Modelling the state of the world as a set of independent states only takes us so far. Applying the theory of languages [8] to state labels, we can generate many more states by forming strings from elementary states, either transversely or longitudinally, with respect to time. The number of effective state labels can then be extended by combinatorics, and a semantic branching process grows a single path into an exponentially large set of distinct paths of a given length. Although a chain of associative reasoning has no limit in length, in principle, the shortest flexible version has three stages. A simple model of triples is often used to represent contextualized scene description [29] (see figure 9): (context,state,attribute) The way agents perceive a scenario goes along way to defining the semantics of a model. Perception and semantics are naturally related: A context or scene 7 → A set of characteristics (states) 

7→ Associated attributes These downstream inferences correspond broadly to questions: Where, When? 7 → What? 7 → How? The effect of mapping this network is to create a Scene Description Language [30], from whence more complex language presumably emerges. For example, if one thinks of arriving on the scene of a murder mystery investigation, detectives first try to capture a snapshot of the scene. Their job begins with describing the evidence accurately. Later this associative chain is turned into an network of inferences, by using past experience to assign importances. Motives about why 

may be assigned effective probabilities, as Bayesian beliefs, to complete the required semantics of an explanation. Thus each semantic concept maps to a temporary assignment of 

P (x|context )

Probabilities may be assigned to the network on the basis of whatever process supplies observational signal: e.g. from a mechanical finite state machine at the technological end of the spectrum, to observational inference at the natural end. Each distinguishable story, associated with an explanation of a scene, refers to selections from a graph like the one in figure 9 11 .The paths through a graph of events represents a network of possible conditional behaviours, representable as effective                     

> 11 The explosion of pathways through the state space is familiar from game theory [31]. The normal form of a game refers to complete coarse-grained strategies, while the extensive form of the game involves every possible sequence of moves by all players [32]. Some of these might be equivalent as a result of symmetries in the branchings. The same problem applies to discriminating intent by inference: clearly any two strategies that lead to the same outcome have equivalent intent. 2. . .
> c1c2i
> ω
> aa1
> variables
> salmon light medium dark HUE THICKNESS wide thin south Atlantic north Atlantic LOCALE autumn summer spring winter SEASON sea bass
> state of world dependence context descriptive attribute
> ωωP( |)P( |)
> ωω
> iiii
> ccaa
> 1212
> P( |)P( |)

Fig. 9: Example of Bayesian network, from Duda et al. This also acts as a basic model for deconstructing semantics from a scenario: from context, to key states of nature, to attributes associated with them. The nodes of the graph are variables whose values play different roles in an inference. [29]. 

promises. Whether in terms of promises or straightforward probabilities for events, the pathways develop the initial sample space into a combinatoric sorting structure: leading us to sequences that are not merely random but contain detailed semantic value. This ability to further classify combinations of states, in a hierarchical structure, is the motivation for taxonomy and ontology in knowledge representations [33]–[35]. In practice, many events may fall into overlapping categories to a significant degree—leading to a ‘classically forbidden’ superposition of pure states 12 . For agents, there is no particular problem with this: it will lead to the same need to make a selection, formally. This is a choice. The potential pitfall, when trying to construct a formal ontology for a scene representation, lies in attempting to find a unique mutually exclusive set of classes for a temporary phenomenon. The temporary nature of the task suggests that a stigmergic approach to memorializing the information is useful, because committing something temporary to long term internal memory would be wasteful and counter-productive. Computationally, the longer a sequence of events gets, the less likely it is to be repeated or be equivalent to another sequence, so the paths will represent unique phenomena. The number of these, i.e. the probable occurrence of a pattern, typically falls off like a negative power law with length [22]. The collection of shortest digital events are therefore not the answer to understanding intentionality (which probably goes a long way to explaining the evolution of language as a reasoning tool): finding unique proper names for every possibility is an inefficient use of memory resources. Hierarchical pattern models of meaning are more useful here because they allow generalization and inference to approximate intent, thus com-

> 12 I call such states, platypus states, since the platypus violates the ‘natural ontology’ by being an egg-laying mammal.

18 pressing the power law into a number of longitudinal steps. The more intricate a semantic model for classification, the more fragile it becomes to being broken by edge cases. This is where the inexplicable abilities of human language to represent meaning have outshone ontologies. 

N. Optimizing information with a least certainty principle 

Maximum likelihood arguments and least certainty principles, are associated with propensities derived from Information Theory [6], [7], [36]. These are now commonly used to talk about probability inference in artificial systems as well as evolutionary biological structures. Information theory characterizes probability distributions and explores strategies for making minimal assumptions (e.g. maximizing uncertainty subject to constraints). The Shannon entropies [6], [7] act as generating functionals for this opti-mization. Such optima are not based on data inputs, but rather on arguments about maximum likelihood—and thus, they are propensity arguments. The negative logarithm of base D, of the probability of obtaining a symbol i is called the information I (sometimes called the ‘surprise’ or even ‘surprisal’) in a message. It measures the average number of alphabetic symbols per unit length of message from an alphabet that classifies event classes 

ωi in a sample space. 

I = − log D pi. (70) The expectation value of this information is the Shannon entropy: 

S = −

> D

X

> i=1

pi log pi, (71) is an information density per unit length of message, and is a theoretical limit on how much a message may be compressed by factoring and reducing symbols. Although Shannon defined information as the average properties of messages, it was based on the obvious notion that it is really the digital symbols (or the semantic pure states), not their averages, that constitutes the bread and butter of information. Defining information purely in terms of probabilities is somewhat misleading, and quickly leads one down paths the confuse knowledge representation with inference 13 .Shannon’s entropy measures are interesting because they act as generators for probability distributions, and we can use them to compare the shapes of distributions in a number of ways. So—to the extent that behavioural patterns are encoded in distributions of actual behaviours—one can use information theoretic forms of entropy to measure the relative shapes of such patterns. However, this method has no checks and balances built in, and the scale-free dimensionless nature of probability allows one to compare highly inappropriate quantities as well 

> 13 It’s a bit like saying that an apple is only defined as a possible configuration of a fruit basket. One could take that point of view, but it misses the point.

as appropriate ones. It can be used as a kind of inference methodology, as long as one keeps control of the data manually. The basic Shannon entropy of a distribution is an average measure of its bias over some distribution of pure states. Minimizing the intentional bias, or maximizing the uncertainty corresponds to a principle for hedging probabilistic strategies. Consider a probability distribution pi, where i = 1 , . . . , D .A completely unbiased distribution is flat, i.e. pi is constant and equal for all i. This is called the unconstrained maximum entropy distribution. The opposite case of a completely biased distribution in which there is a single pi = 1 , and all other 

pj̸ =i = 0 (the Dirac delta distribution) is the unconstrained minimum entropy distribution. Entropy thus acts as a generator for constraining the probability mass function. One can maximize it, subject to different constraints, to find the distribution with the least amount of bias. This is independent of the meaning of the probability. It’s actually a property of the dimensionless ratios. If one thinks of a probability distribution (with a fixed number of categories D) as a characterizing the statistical composition of a message formed from a sequence of events. The message is thus viewed as consisting of an alphabet of 

D symbols. The Shannon entropy then acts as a generating function for distributions. The unconstrained maximum entropy distribution satisfying 

δS δp = 0 , (72) leads to the maximum entropy distribution pi = const . One may add certain additional constraints using the method of Lagrange multipliers. One can add to this constraints such as the normalization condition: P 

> i

pi = 1 :

Snorm = α

> D

X

> i=1

pi − 1

!

(73) This is already hinting that normalization is a possibly prob-lematic constraint. The constraint of constant expectation value for some quantity Ei with the Boltzmann distribution: 

SBoltz = β

> D

X

> i=1

(piEi − ⟨ E)⟩

!

. (74) The solution to this problem is sometimes called a Boltzmann mixed state 14 in physics, since it mixes different Ei observable outcomes into an ensemble average. 

pi = e−βE i

P 

> j

e−βE j , (75) and for thermal systems, once identifies the inverse temperature 

β = 1 /kT . The Gaussian distribution is also a maximum entropy distribution, for probability with a constant proximity to a single average value [37]. 

> 14 Note that, in this usage, state refers to an ensemble macrostate, not a microstate of an ensemble component.
> 19

Example 7 (Swarm behaviour): In earlier work I speculated that a swarm is a collection of autonomous agents that acts to minimize its informational entropy [38], i.e. that the cohesion of the swarm (over any promised attributes) is characterized by a tendency for agents to align with one another. In this sense, it is a generalization of the old XY model of spins, with a generalized interpretation of spin and some random selection. In swarms, 80 percent of a swarm may try to stay together, while the remainder go off at random to explore new possibilities. The latter possibility is what discovers new dynamical configurations and prevents the swarm from crystallizing into a ferromagnetic state. There are two key variables for the agents in a swarm: their direction of flight and their inter-agent separation. For example, in two dimensions, we could describe classes of direction by an angle class θi(t)/2π, where θi(t) is the velocity direction of agent Ai. If we assume that the agents fly with approximately constant speed, then the velocity distribution is like vi = vp i

and the probability p(θ) 

> i

of flying in this direction has entropy 

Sθ . Similarly, the average distance between agents p(xi) is distributed around some fixed distance that maximizes the safety of the agents: too close may risk collision, while too far risks losing cohesion for navigation or attack from predators. The maximum entropy distribution for distance subject to R p(x)( dx ) = 1 and R (dx )( x − μ)2p(x) = 0 , for each xi

is 

p(xi, t ) 7 → N (xi, μ (t), σ 2(t)) (76) 

N (x, μ, σ 2) ≡ 1

√2πσ 2 e− 12 (x(t)−μ)2/σ 2

. (77) where N (x, μσ 2) is the Gaussian (normal) distribution, which we define here for future reference. Thus, we have turned a dynamical problem into a problem about probabilities, though not based on data—based on a variational argument. This may be regarded as propensity for the inter-agent distance in a three dimensional space, at an instance in time t, where μ(t) is an average position of its nearest neighbours in the whole swarm. In order to calculate this individually for each agent Ai, every agent must promise to be visible and each Ai must be able to sense the position of its neighbours. As a probability calculation, this is beyond the capabilities of simple agents, but as a predictive principle based on avoidance, it is a plausible prediction. 

O. Convergence of intent: Predictive Coding and Active Inference 

The model of ‘Predictive Coding’, in neuroscience, has attracted a lot of attention in connection with inference and pattern recognition in neural systems [39], [40]. It is a probabilistic approach to perception. A variant of this called Active Inference [41]–[45], proposes a variational approach based on so-called ‘Free Energy Principle’, which can be interpreted in a number of different ways. Pragmatically, it is an approximation, which may be used to solve for a fixed point by using a variational parameter. In that sense, it is version of Feynman’s variational method for statistical mechanics [46]. More subtly, by applying Bayes theorem to invert the order of dependency in a sensory data pipeline, it turns inference into an argument about the convergence of sensory experience, somewhat like the CFEngine concept of convergence [47]. The philosophy behind the approach is the suggestion that organisms seek out a local fixed point equilibrium of information about the world. Imagine that an agent, or set of agents, observes the world and builds a model of the world in terms of associations between sensory stimuli and internal interpretations. The hypothesis goes that organism’s cognitive faculties essentially promise a convergence of this key-value association based on a minimization of Shannon’s joint entropy. The idea is similar to that proposed in [38] for swarm behaviour. A critique of the method may be found in [48] and an extensive thesis investigation in [49]. An example, which reveals what is actually going on between the beautified arguments, may be found in [45]. which can be approached either by altering the world or by altering an average model. We suppose the purpose of a brain is to converge to a model which minimizes the predictive ‘error’ for interpreting what is senses. Since error is subjective and defined somewhat vaguely, it ends up being a relative moving target. However, as a single mechanism, it might account for many phenomena. In short, the suggestion is that perception is not purely the bottom-up aggregation of sensory promises (+) , but actually a top-down selection by acceptance promises (−) of a prior representation of the concept, which drives prediction. Recognition can only be based on a dictionary of existing concepts. The hypothesis has been transformed into a discussion of Bayesian probability distributions, which makes it familiar to a wide range of researchers, but which does not try to explain how it might be realized by agents, such as neurons. I’ll not attempt to resolve this issue here, but it seems plausible that Promise Theory’s autonomous agents might help to do so. We can begin by reformulating the arguments in terms of Promise Theory concepts. 

Example 8 (The Predictive Coding approach): According to the method of active inference, the goal of a learning ‘brain’ is to minimize the semantic distance between external observation and interior model and thus infer a classification. where the semantic distance is measured by the relative entropy, expressed in the form of the Kullback-Liebler divergence. 

DKL (Q|P ) = 

Z

dQ Q log 

 QP



. (78) The proposal is broadly that, over time, predictions and empirical behaviours converge so as to minimize the relative entropy of the behavioural probability Q∗(x|| M ). The brain is supposed to have a generative model of a scenario, expressed in probabilities P (x|| M ). The variables x are called ‘actions’ here—they would correspond to ‘intentions’ in a promise theoretic model. They correspond to the behavioural variables of the model. The goal of predictive coding, and active 

> 20

inference, is to fit an estimate of the posterior distribution 

Q(x|| M ) to the actual posterior P (x|| M ), by functional minimization of: 

min  

> λ

DKL (Q(x|| M, λ ) || P (x|| M )) , (79) The convergence of the solution may be learned iteratively, layer by layer, in a neural processor and may be adjusted on either distribution, e.g. by learning new behaviours P or by changing behaviours Q. This observation is perhaps the core of the idea. Expressed in terms of Bayesian probability, the idea has a number of problems. When DKL = 0 , the variational distribution equals the ‘true’ distribution and one has solved the inference problem—though without a clear definition of a correct answer. It solves the position of the swarm even while the swarm is still gyrating. Since the ideal minimization is potentially difficult, one attempts a variational approximation. The variational ‘free energy’ F15 reverses the Bayesian order to obtain an upper bound on the answer [40]. 

DKL (Q(x|| M, λ ) || P (x|| M )) = DKL (Q(x|| M, λ ) || P (M, x )

P (M ) )= DKL (Q(x|| M, λ ) || P (M, x )) + log P (M )

≤ DKL (Q(x|| M, λ ) || P (M, x )) 

≡ F(λ). (80) where P is the generative model of probability for actions x,

Q is the variational fit, and M is the presumptive model. As an agent problem, learning may be thought of as a kind of swarm of virtual agent neurons, which are flying with some synchronicity. Each individual agent’s probability could be modelled as a maximum entropy Gaussian, like (77) around some fluid configuration. The expectation maximization algorithm then takes turns in optimizing F with respect to λ,keeping M fixed, then the other way around, until there is best possible convergence. Using probability as a key-value representation of a behaviour is a way of representing its ‘shape’ in a linear sample space. As a computational model, this has been related to approaches to reinforcement learning [25], [40]. It’s unclear whether that method is a fair representation of a brain. The probabilistic arguments make the concept accessible to a wide audience, but conceal some pitfalls, when applied to agent systems (as noted by [45]). A valid critique concerns the ability to compute distributions of probability over a population, which is not managed from above—and more specifically, to           

> 15 The thermodynamical roots of the free energy concept refer to acharacterization of the amount of activity in a system that is available for doing work [26], [50]. In the case of perception, work means the process of arriving at an inference. Entropy is that part of the total energy which has been distributed into useless background noise. It only adds to the uncertainty of the signal remaining ‘free energy’. In Friston’s free energy conception, probabilities do not have the dimensions of thermodynamic entropy or energy, but they do capture the same spirit: that of a focused ‘accounting variable’, which is what energy does in a different context.

calculate the normalization of probabilities based on plausible signals (see equation (29)), which is essential to all Bayesian methods. As a dimensionless ratio, probability is a fully scale-free characterization of relative importance, but belief cannot be a scale free character as it would never be able to distinguish between scales. Without a central controller to maintain shared information, normalization across multiple agents is both problematic to calibrate and calculate. Taking a probabilistic method at face value, each agent involved in a calculation needs access to the total sample size. A single stage aggregating node, with N

inputs can (at least in principle) count the number of active acceptance or receptor promises is has and use this as a local count. However, if an agent is to calculate Bayesian rescalings, imported from a multitude of agents, we have to be careful in assuming that upstream values propagated by one agent are calibrated with the same meaning as downstream agents (figure 7). The same caveat applies when making top-down variational arguments about the distribution of properties across a popula-tion of agents, as in section III-N , for instance to maximize or minimize some uncertainty. Maximum likelihood distributions, which postulate a cooperative organization across several agents have no causal potency. They apply to each agent individually. When invoking an argument based on information, we therefore have to ask: what behaviour in agents might lead to an effective tendency to optimize behaviour effectively as a swarm? A godlike observer, looking down on a flock of birds has no causal influence over their behaviour, so its ability to calculate inter-agent probabilities post hoc cannot be used as an explanation of their behaviour. The signalling between the agents is the causal prerequisite. In this case, we may be looking for a potential argument rather than a probability. Let’s apply the variational principle in a different way, following a promise theoretic approach, which follows that laid out by [45], but with a revised narrative and a forgetting algorithm to replace Newton’s method. This serves as a neat summary of all the foregoing methodologies. 

Example 9 (Convergence approach): Suppose we have a sensor agent S, and a number of downstream agents that help with the processing of its input. We can try the active inference approach, this time using the CFEngine style minimal computation convergent method [16]. This aligns well with the method discussed in [45]. We consider a small collection of specialized agents, each contributing to a calculation of an optimum key-value lookup. The goal of this collaboration is to match sensory signals to approximate measures of size or distance. For example, in the example of [45], this could be an animal looking at different items and trying to gauge the type of food, or birds flying close together in a swarm monitoring each other’s positions, by guessing some feature ϕ such as the size or distance based on observed light. A possibly non-linear transmutation of the signal, with dimensions going from from lumens to metres, may be involved in order to calibrate meaning. There are many similar problems one can imagine 

> 21

in which one uses a learned key-value table to transform a sensory (prior) signal into a semantic (posterior) inference (see figure 10). We formulate the problem of associating the correct inference of feature ϕ to the input signal τ by maximizing a likelihood function. It’s not clear that this is implementable with elemen-tary agents yet, but I’ll come back to that. We could treat this maximum likelihood function either as a dimensional potential or as a dimensionless probability. Since everything can be kept linear, the details are not important, but there is a small semantic bonus to thinking about the problem in a Bayesian way. I’ll follow the discussion of [45] 16 .The organism’s brain contains a collection of autonomous agents associated with this model of recognition, as well as a much larger part that we won’t pretend to model. This small portion of agent circuity will learn about the relationship between light and size or distance, as in [45], by forming an associative lookup capability, so that the module can promise to decode a sensory potential and transform it into a measurement. Such an association could be modelled by any kind of joint potential or joint probability function p(light , size )

or V (light , size ). the discussion in [45] is instructive, as it highlights some of the difficulties with measurement that elementary agents face. The arrangement of agents is shown, approximately in figure 10. Light stimuli come from ‘without’, i.e. outside the organism. The function of the light sensor agent is to emit a signal τ ,given some input light: 

πS : S −light 

−−−→ Environment (87) 

S +τ | light 

−−−−−→ Li. (88) where Li are the agents that deal with remembering light values. Without filling in all the details, these agents must accept the signal and calculate the parts of an expression to predict a direction for gradient ascent: 

Li

> −τ

−−→ S, (89) 

Li 

> +σ2(τ)|τ

−−−−−−→ A′. (90) making their own promises to calculate mean and variance (see equation (14) and the subsequent discussion). Similarly, a set of agents Mi, dealing with the semantics of distance maintain an interior model of how distance fits together with the light measurements. 

Mi

> +ϕ

−−→ (91)                                         

> 16 The notation has been altered in relation to [45]:
> v7→x−variable (81)
> vp7→ ⟨ x⟩−variable mean (82)
> Σp7→σ2(x)−variable variance (83)
> g(v)7→T(x)−variable to ⟨τ⟩converter (84)
> u7→τ−sensory sample potential (85)
> Στ7→σ2(τ)−sample variance (86)

So, independently, from within the organism, there is a model of dynamical variables x, that will converge to stable values ϕ,representing features of the world, one of which is modelled as an example here. The hypothesis now is that the function of the brain is to promise to associate the best value for this feature with a sensory potential τ . Clearly, this leaves many questions unanswered, but it’s a beginning to modelling the perception of the collective. Mem Mem      

> σ2
> (φ)
> Mem Mem Mem
> σ2( ) T( ) φ
> σ (φ) 2
> <φ> − φ
> +| light τ
> σ2( )
> S-light
> metres lumens
> <φ> τ
> +< > τ
> A - B difference + φ + φ
> brain
> φT’
> ττ- T( )

Fig. 10: The agents and promises in a Predictive Coding sensory inference pipeline, sketched roughly. Each circle is an agent. The stippled super agents clusters act as modules for partial memory centres where running averages are kept. An approximate ‘maximum likelihood’ estimate of the dynamical variable’s feature ϕ is computed within a few sampling iterations. We assume that each agent is working to sample inputs and recompute outputs according to its own resources. 

What the collective wants to know is: which x yields the maximum likelihood of associating an input light signal with internal representation τ . We denote the best effort value of the feature x 7 → ϕ, and we’ll calculate it by maximizing an association, subject to some promise constraints: 

max p(τ, ϕ )|π (92) This represents a kind of search operation on the space of 

> EXPRESS

ed promised values [51], subject to constraints that the final value ϕ converges on a single (hopefully correct) answer. As autonomous agents, we imagine that every agent is doing its job at all times, at its own rate—as opposed to a pipeline of data driven from the exterior light impulse. There is no single calculation resulting in the devastating truth, but rather a continuously adjusting picture of the world as it happens. Searching for the optimum involves several unknowns. If we use Bayes theorem, we can rewrite the search as an asymmetric conditional probability, which leads to a method for using the free energy approximation to the result. We are looking for an agent A whose role is to promise to take τ and return a ϕ:

πA : A +ϕ|τ

−−−→ A′ (93) This association can’t be a Markov process, like a simple function, as it will converge by depending on a memory of what it has seen in the past, and we expect new information to update its memory of what is most likely too. It makes sense to associate the conditional promise (93), i.e. πA(x|τ ) with a 

22 conditional probability P (x|| τ ) (which we may also refer to as the response function R(x|| τ ) of the organism), for a ‘feature vector’ x. If we solve for this instead, it effectively locates an upper bound for the response function, as noted earlier in (80). The organism will already have some idea of what x it may be looking at, and further samples τ will correct that. I use the symbol τ for the events of the sensory input signal, to indicate its role as driving the time-base of the pipeline. While a Bayesian representation helps us to make sense of this challenge, it’s not clear that it would be implementable by a collective of autonomous agents. A variational approach, called the Free Energy Principle that uses Gaussian trial functions for the likely shape of the response, offers a suitable method for autonomous agents, because it is a maximum uncertainty function, centered around a mean value. This also aligns with a minimum certainty principle as a worst case scenario. If we maximize an association response, based on aspeculative trial version of x 7 → ϕ, then we can construct a plausible approximation to the response function at the maximum likelihood solution. The good news is that—despite Bayesian appearances—we don’t need the whole distribution, only the region of maximum likelihood, so we won’t have to waste a lot of memory remembering useless detail. So our response function is, applying Bayes’ theorem: 

R(x|| τ ) = P (x|| τ ) = P (τ || x)P (x)

P (τ ) , (94) where P (τ || x) may be interpreted the associative signal threshold for recognizing the attribute x. The ‘free energy’ F

is defined as the negative logarithm of the maximum likelihood response: 

−F (x, τ ) = L(x, τ ) = log( P (x|| τ )) = log( x) + log( P (τ || x)) − log( P (τ )) .

(95) We want to maximize this with respect to x 7 → ϕ, and thus compute: 

∂L (ϕ, τ )

∂ϕ 7 → 0. (96) The last term in (95) is independent of ϕ, so we can ignore it. The independent agents will behave simply, and with bounded uncertainty. Using trial Gaussian functions for the first two terms of (95): 

P (x) 7 → N (x, ⟨x⟩, σ 2(x)) (memory) (97) 

P (τ || x) 7 → N (τ, ⟨T (x)⟩, σ 2(τ )) (sensory) (98) we can calibrate or map one normal response to another, like a key-value table. where x and τ have different measures or dimensions: τ is measured, say, in lumens, and x in metres. 

T (x) is a function or process that transmutes an agent’s memory value of x into a value that can be compare to a sensory potential τ (i.e. with the same dimensions), and we have defined P (τ || ϕ) so as to seek a maximum response where the converted ‘remembered value’ of T (ϕ) matches the current input value τ . Substituting for N (x, μ, σ 2) from equation (77), and differentiating 

∂L ∂x =

 ⟨x⟩ − xσ2(x) + τ − T (x)

σ2(τ ) · ∂T (x)

∂x 



> x=ϕ

. (99) We want this to approach zero from our best estimate of ϕ, and adjust it according to the sensory potential τ . By writing this Bayes decomposition the ‘wrong way around’, we are saying that our trial value of x will act as an attractor for the optimal answer, so that—after a few iterations—the input τ and x will be a matching pair. This is a complex expression for an elementary agent to compute exactly, so it is implausible that a neuron could find an exact answer. However, as [45] points out, this isn’t strictly necessary. All we really need is the sign of updates to ϕ

in response to τ , and ∂T /∂x can probably be assumed to be strictly positive. In addition, the dimensionless variables used by Friston in his original paper present a problem for an elementary agent, because a standard deviation σ requires a square root to be calculated, where as σ2 is merely additive. This may, in fact, be an advantage. We don’t necessarily want a scale-free representation as it would not be able to distinguish actual sizes. The conclusion is that a simple agent only needs to emit two kinds of signal for positive and negative updates, based on differences and overall multiplying scales. The rate of convergence is unlikely to be optimal, but it should end up at a stable answer for ϕ, which is yet to be calibrated downstream of the cognitive process anyway. So, if we imagine a time variable associated with samples of 

τi, for i = 1 , 2, . . . etc, then given a prior estimate of ϕ(ti) from memory, a new estimate can be checked from observing with the sensor to produce u(ti+1 ), then approximately following the gradient towards the maximum: 

ϕ(τi+1 ) = ϕ(τi) + ∂L ∂ϕ ∆ϕ2, (100) where ∆ϕ2 is a small increment with the dimensions of [ϕ2]

to make the second term small compared to the first, 

∂L ∂ϕ ∆ϕ2 ≃ sign ( ∂L ∂ϕ )∆ ϕ, (101) and 

⟨ϕ(τi+1 )⟩ = λϕ (τi+1 ) + (1 − λ) ⟨ϕ(τi)⟩, (102) for some λ. If the increments are small enough, this scale may be chosen as an arbitrary constant, since we only care about the sign of the derivative. This final remark underlines a basic lesson of Promise Theory studies: in order to work in a classically predictive way, agents must make accurate promises, i.e. be able to effectively represent quantities that are real valued numbers, with quite good accuracy. For this to be true, the density of interior states must be sufficiently high to capture the phenomena concerned. 

> 23

P. Trust as a running cognitive attention potential 

Trust is closely related to the semantics of promises for a reasoning agent. It is a mnemonic for a process that summarizes how agents select promises from others and attend to their progress. For completeness, I summarize the main findings of Promise Theory [52], [53]. Agents with interior memory may choose to monitor their interactions with one another. This leads to an understanding of the basis for Dunbar’s social brain hypothesis [53]–[55]. The assessment functions an agent associates with promises from other agents are a measure of the reliability in keeping promises—which is a measure of the agent’s trustworthiness. The assessed ‘probability’ V of keeping a promise is a measure of an agent’s trustworthiness with respect to that promise is a form of invested work accounting, and can be turned into a specific rate of kinetic work by straightforward dimensional arguments—identical to those for energy conservation. The rate of kinetic velocity of mistrust v is determined by dimensional analysis 12 mv 2 ∝ V . Thus, trust in Promise Theory is a process of watching over other agents on a continuous basis. It results in slowly varying potentials and responses [53]. Trustworthiness V (process potential energy) is a summary of historically accumulated work of alignment with past promises, expressed as a coarse snapshot of the slowly-varying history. It has the semantics of reliability or believability for each individual agent to assess. Conversely, attentiveness (process kinetic energy) is an immediate release of work at some rate or velocity, in response to residual uncertainty, expressed directionally by the potential alignment. 

Example 10 (Agent clustering and social group sizes): The work of a single agent, interacting in a group of size N , would be expected to scale as 

W (agent) = c1 + c2(N − 1) + . . . c0Nβ

(103) where c0, c1, and c2 are constants [53]. At low utilization, we can expect the availability or channel capacity to be approximately proportional to the number of agents interacting. Once contentions sets in, this effective number slows down as agents begin to leave a group to an average—which is the value at which contention is maximal. When βE = 0 , the probability has to be 1, so for N = 1 (self), all the share is in one agent’s hands. So c1 = 0 . Now we have a single scale C ≡ c2/c 0 representing the level of shared of contention between agents. To determine this, we use the promise seed configuration again below. Note that, at maximum entropy, a group is evenly distributed by definition, without favour to any particular agent, so based on these dimensional arguments, we expect the large N limit to take the form of a Boltzmann distribution: 

P (β) ∼ exp 



− χ(N − 1) 

Nβ



, (104) where Nβ is some scale that characterizes the intra-group contention. Small χ implies tolerance of contention, or loose coupling and thus larger group sizes, while large χ implies some kind of territorial overlap that leads to altercation. We assume, based on maximum entropy arguments, that at large N , averaged over large ensembles the probable work fraction P (W ) for distribution takes the form of a Boltzmann distribution over the relative costs [26], [37]: 

P ∼ e−βE (105) where (dimensionless) βE 7 → W (agent )

Total capacity ,(106) where the availability is the finite budget for shared resource channel capacity. We recall, from Shannon [6], that the channel capacity is a dimensionless representation of the power: 

C = B log 



1 + W (agent )

Cost of contention 



(107) where B is the maximum bandwidth for throughput, which is consistent with our assumption. With these points in mind, and assuming that interactions between group members are not ‘all at once’, but interleaved approximately one at a time, the accumulated work should be proportional to the group remainder size: 

Wn ≤ Wmax 

N . (108) We can take the cognitive capacity as a share for work: 

(N − 1) WN = 12 mv 2, (109) for some rate v. Now, we arrange to measure these quantities in units such that we can compare dimensionless ratios. In dimensionless form, we can compare the only matching scales in the problem: 

(N − 1) WN

Wmax 

= 12

mmmin 

 vvmax 

2

, (110) We make the identification, 

WN

Wmax 

mmin 

m ≡ β

⟨N ⟩T

, (111) which has the form Fractional work effort Fractional cost of involvement × efficiency , (112) where we use the constant β ≤ 1 as an efficiency. This is motivated by the identification of ⟨N ⟩T as the scale for group size with maximal contention cost. From (111) we interpret the Dunbar group size as being based on: 

⟨N ⟩T = fraction of work budget × cognitive efficiency .(113) From data [56], ⟨N ⟩T is associated with data called the group contention cost, which is an emergent scaling limit determined by looking to the group size at which contention arises, or when 

⟨N ⟩T agents are all watching closely. We can now predict the dimensionless propensity for finding a group of size N , by combining growth and decay, according to the equilibrium of the attachment and detachment rates. The probability balances probabilistic attachment and detachment, shaped by a trust 

> 24

potential which is learned by a past history memory process. Growth is initially by invested kinetic effort in aligned order √ν and decay is by average disordered contention exp( −ν)

(see figure 11). 

ψ(ν) = 4

√πν 12 e−ν

⟨N ⟩T

, (114) where 

ν = 2β(N − 1) 

⟨N ⟩T

, (N > 1) , (115) and β corresponds to a dimensionless (probabilistic) rate of promise keeping. 00.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 psi(N) n

Fig. 11: Curve fit of data using the formula in equation 115 with a data from around 200,000 agents on Wikipedia from [53]. 

It’s quite rare to be in a position to compare theory with data in such a scenario, but here we are fortunate [53]. Here, we have a model of the most probable size of a social group in a seeded collaboration of agents with human characteristics. Trust obviously has some semantics associated with moral judgements, which may use far more simplistic arguments, based on assessments made by some custodians of truth, such as police or a court of law. It is trivial to make the following Bayesian moral criteria: 

Example 11 (Honest and dishonest agents): In general, the existence of a promise would be expected to increase the likelihood of an event keeping the promise: 

P (ekeep (π)|| π(Ahonest )) ≥ P (ekeep (π)||¬ π(Ahonest )) (116) However a dishonest agent may behave in the opposite way. 

P (ekeep (π)|| π(Adishonest )) ≤ P (ekeep (π)||¬ π(Adishonest )) (117) The trustworthiness is a generalization of this assessment. 

Q. Semantic spacetime and paths 

The physical graph of promises between agents, as the spacetime of active sources in a dynamic system, is mirrored by another graph: a virtual realm of all the data variables 

xa(Ai), which live inside the agents and may, in principle, be shared between them. These variables and representations form a space called Semantic Spacetime [9]–[11]. Like a probability distribution, it is unclear whether one could actually construct this space from real data; but, as a speculative model of observed properties, Semantic Spacetime is a representation of concepts and ideas, which the agents may be considered to be ‘thinking about’. Semantic spacetime forms a directed graph, in which there are four kinds of arrow [51], [57]: temporal or causal arrows, spatial containment, descriptive attributes, and semantic similarities. The arrows have explanatory semantics and may also have weights, indicating their relative importance to downstream processes. The semantic spacetime construction is similar to (but goes beyond) Wright’s decomposition rule [24] for causative correlations, using Reichenbach’s common cause principle. For events, causation may imply process graphs in which processes look somewhat like Feynman path integrals:  

> •

ea causes eb directly,  

> •

ea causes ea directly,  

> •

ea and eb share a common cause. Causation generally requires some confirmation by counterfac-tual inference: 

P (ea∩eb) > P (ea)P (eb) (118) 

P (ea∩eb|| ec) = P (ea|| ec)P (eb|| ec) (119) 

P (ea|| ec) > P (ea||¬ ec) (120) 

P (eb|| ec) > P (eb||¬ ec). (121) To apply Wright’s transformation from correlation functions 

∆ab = ⟨(ea − ⟨ ea⟩)( eb − ⟨ eb⟩)⟩

σaσb

, (122) where ⟨. . . ⟩ is the expectation value and σ is the standard deviation, we transform events into dimensionless variables: 

νa = xa − ⟨ xa⟩

σa

, (123) and form an adjacency matrix of path coefficients, or probabil-ities pab , such that: 

∆ab = X

> c

pbc ∆ac . (124) 

= X

> c

αi(Ψ c). (125) where Ψc is a single directed acyclic path joining the source 

xa to xbb. The valuation function αi() is none other than an assessment function of agent Ai. This linear relation can be inverted to yield weights on the edges of the semantic graph, 

25 where the p matrices act like probability amplitudes along the path, between the pure states: 

pT p = 1 . (126) Semantic spacetime is thus the graph in which the nodes are promise valuations for semantic relationships of observable attributes. The valuations are an undirected representation of the directed graphs, since we have factored out the causal semantics by defining paths with components ψ. The set of semantic spacetime nodes is now formed from interior variables to the physical agents, and may be used to form a global picture of the world of the agents for some ‘godlike’ observer. 

R. Remarks about probability 

As a generic toolbox, probability is a powerful abstraction, albeit an ambiguous one. When invoking probability, we are implicitly asking: how can we understand the process which counts data without all the information (or how can we guess how data would be counted, if we could do the experiment)? The probability is an incomplete description. It eliminates important questions. How did we normalized? Over what spacetime scale are we averaging the frequencies or computing the propensities? What accuracy can we expect? It is up to the researcher to supplement these details. LEARN PREDICT 

> sensors memory model aggregation discrimination

Fig. 12: From a parallel sensor array, through a pipeline of influence, to a memory representation. First, independent signals must be collated and classified, then stored in some interior representation, so first there is aggregation and then sparse representation. The final size is likely much larger than the original sensory image, so one must be economical in storage representation. 

If we want to make a quantitative theory of promises, in terms of either potentials or probabilities, then which variables should we choose to count? Some critical points:  

> •

A successful model depends on how the pure state classes 

ωa are chosen to parameterize behaviour.  

> •

An event does not imply intent and an intention does not imply the generation of any events.  

> •

An event that appears to fulfil a promise, that was not given, is not evidence of actual intent, but if repeated enough times might be evidence of an effective intention, or an inherited bias.  

> •

Small scale changes should not infer large scale predic-tions.  

> •

Conditional promise is an indication of causal behaviour, but a conditional probability is only a possible indication 

of causal behaviour. A joint event is a correlation; writing it as a pre-conditional expression is only a biased rescaling. Finally, a promise that generates no associated events to fulfil its intention may be considered a lie. IV. Q UANTUM AND STATISTICAL STATE DESCRIPTIONS 

Turning directly to probability may not always the most appropriate representation for a physical system evolving in time. It is always preferable to model the interior configurations of dynamical variables directly if we know what they are. From Quantum Mechanics, we learn an important lesson about how a partial model can tell us much more than probability alone can, albeit with certain caveats [19], [58], [59]. A vector (Hilbert) space representation of allowed states for a dynamical process gives us an algorithm for the feature axes, or pure states, as the solution of a boundary problem as eigenvectors of the dynamical constraints. A bounded quantum mechanical problem has some similari-ties to an autonomous agent. Each bounded region contains its dynamical content autonomously. We can begin by assuming that such states are ‘within’ the system, and therefore we can think of it as an agent. For example, a hydrogen atom, or a square well potential has a set of states that are determined by the solution of a constraint equation that specifies a spacetime geometry for a process. 

A. States generated by spacetime geometry 

A quantum state formalism leads to a quasi-statistical description, whose interpretation is still much debated. It has some similarities with Boltzmann’s statistical mechanics [46]: the two can be connected into a unified treatment at a certain scale, at the expense of overlooking a number phenomena that average out on a bulk scale. Conversely, a system traditionally thought of as a fundamental can be written as a statistical theory by re-framing it on a vector or Hilbert space. Most of classical physics is unbounded and concerns weakly constrained motion (of the first kind), which sets it apart from agent systems in Promise Theory, which start from bound states. Tradition in probabilistic methods encourages us to imagine a single universal passage of time that we might call observer time, in which some clock on a wall tells us its unambiguous count from some arbitrary event. In practice, this is not a useful abstraction in a distributed system. Wherever independent processes run in parallel, each agent has its own clock that does not necessarily advance at the same rate as others’. Quantum Mechanics also involves a number of different time semantics that are left to the observant reader to interpret. The 

> 26

interpretation of these states as generators for a probabilistic interpretation would normally indicate the existence of a deeper level, faster process, whose statistics are reflected in the probabilistic amplitudes. |i> |j>         

> O^1
> O^2
> Bounded space Agent
> π(+)
> π(−) λλλλ
> 3421
> (x,y,z,t) t
> λλλ123
> λ4

Fig. 13: Representing bounded capabilities. In quantum mechanics, the boundary of a geometry and potential function of a spacetime arrangement (e.g. a square well or isolated hydrogen atom) forms a constraint on an energy distribution process, leading to a set of supportable eigenstates. Observables representing differential physical processes each have a set of supportable eigenstates that give observed value of a single observation. Agents are independent bounded regions, each of which has interior resources and states, outside of normal spacetime. These are not represented by differential geometric equations, but rather by computable functions. The representation of allowed states is analogous in both cases. 

In Quantum Mechanics, a system of study has a spacetime geometry which, ideologically, precedes everything else. One begins by making these boundary conditions consistent with continuity and conversation laws. The dynamics of a wave vector are determined by these factors. Observables correspond to spacetime ‘processes’ that are encoded as differential (or matrix) operations, with appropriate dimensions and geometry. The shift to a conceptual space of possible states, formed by linear combinations of continuous eigenfunctions, 

ˆO|i⟩ = λOi |i⟩. (127) takes a step towards a partly-knowable interior dynamics. We can map this picture onto autonomous agents as an alternative way of approaching the integration of independent agents [12]. Each isolated system can be associated with a density matrix is assumed to have a complete set of pure states i⟩ ↔ ωi, which spans and plausibly characterizes its instantaneous activity. A complete representation, assumes that one knows its interior generating function H. One uses the terminology of ‘pure state’ to mean one that is an eigenstate of its constraints (represented by the Hamiltonian), so that a linear combination is an interior superposition, simultaneous with respect to interior time. 

ψpure (x, t ) = X

> i

ci(x, t ) |i⟩⟩, (X

> i

|ci|2 = 1) (128) The spherical constraint (referring to the surface of th Bloch sphere) indicates that these pure states are specially constrained by a rigid evolution, in which the system moves from pure state to pure state, rotated only by a phase (like a gauge choice), thus conserving the instantaneous probability. A mixed state is a more arbitrary convex combination of the same complete set, in which the distribution of probabilities is not dynamically constrained on the inside of the Bloch sphere: the weighting is assumed to be assembled from an ensemble or statistical mixture. Thus it now refers to longer coarse grains of shared co-time between agents. The definition of time has changed, since the smallest interval is now the time average of many pure configurations 17 .

ψpure (x, t ) = X

> i

mi(x, t ) |i⟩⟩, (X

> i

mi = 1) (129) The same temporal redefinition applies when autonomous agents are joined into a statistical ensemble. 

B. Density matrix representation for agent interactions 

The density matrix is often introduced to relate states and probabilities of interconnected systems [46]. One can treat a chain of agents as a chain of interacting pseudo-quantum systems too. Along each hop of an agent pipeline, or path joining agents in a shared process, we can also represent the state evolution from the perspective of either sender or receiver, using a density matrix [19]. From the perspective of autonomous agents, at any scale, the picture is one where a local process in one agent observes another remote process in a neighbouring agent, and we can view the interaction as a temporary composite system. The density matrix for a local agent lives on the same variable space as the evolving interior processes, but contains information from the neighbour-driven mixture. In a privileged observer view, the space and time variables are exterior variables that are common to the composite system. The density operator on these states ρ is an operator on Ai, which has interior states Ii. The exterior states belong to another co-entangled system Aj . It’s convenient to relabel these as sender and receiver along an oriented path Si and Rj (figure 14). The implication is that there are two timescales: a fast interior process which is being observed over a partially equilibrated slowly-moving macrostate. Macrostates are usually thought of as macroscopic systems, but that’s relative. To foster associations between agents and quantum states, we introduce a Dirac notation for the states of promise agents in semantic spacetime. The double bra-ket lines should remind us that the nature of these states is not to be associated necessarily with a quantum Hilbert space, indeed need not be defined in detail here, except to say that they are assumed normalizable. Depending on the nature of the agents a complete set of states spanning the agent’s ‘possibility space’ may take various forms. Let 

|Ai⟩⟩ (130) 

> 17 It is commonly stated that a classical system cannot be in a superposition of pure states, only as an ensemble or mixed state. This is not strictly true, as it depends on an assumed representation. A boundary for what constitutes the interior of the system as opposed to what represents multiple copies or trials, and a separation of timescales can easily give the impression of a system being in multiple equivalent states. Superpositions of interior states are possible. For example, a fish may be light and dark in patches when examined in detail. When measured, the net average may still collapse into either light or dark as a function of the measurement process.

27 i jS RFig. 14: Motion along a channel from coarse-grained superagent to superagent provides the most general scaled picture of transitions. This view leads naturally to a density matrix formulation due to the separation of interior and exterior process variables. The scale at which we describe this process now matters. If the circles represent a scale S, then the arrows are shown at scale S − 1.

be the interior states of agent Ai, which are unobservable to other agents. Consider a capacity allocation process ψ(Ai, A j ). The joint distribution of available resources can be written: 

ψ(Si, R j ) = X

> i

ci(Rj ) I(Si), (131) for some set of interior states Ii and exterior states Ej .

Ii(Si) = ⟨⟨Si|Ii⟩⟩ = ⟨⟨Si|i⟩⟩ (132) 

Ej (Rj ) = ⟨⟨Rj |Ej ⟩⟩ = ⟨⟨Rj |j⟩⟩ (133) The most general interaction distribution would be a product state [12]: 

ψ ∼ S ⊗ R ∼ I ⊗ E, (134) which implies an accepted channel for promise keeping ψ,with a complete set of states in the sample space Ω, denoted 

|Ii⟩⟩ and |Ek⟩⟩ :

|ψ⟩⟩ = X

> i,j

cij |Ii⟩⟩| Ek⟩⟩. (135) In Dirac notation, (131) becomes 

ψ(Ai, A j ) = ⟨⟨Aj |⟨ ⟨Ai|ψ⟩⟩ (136) 

= X

> i,j

cij ⟨⟨Ai|Ii⟩⟩⟨ ⟨Aj |Ej ⟩⟩, (137) and comparing to (131), we have the coefficients expressed as projected linear combinations of exterior process availability: 

ci(Aj ) = X

> j

cij ⟨⟨Aj |Ej ⟩⟩. (138) So, if we consider this simple two-agent promised transition process π−π+ to be an operation on these states, without needing to explain its representation, then we can express this transition as an effective current: 

π(−) 

> δq

π(+)  

> δq

= X

> i,j

|Ii⟩⟩| Ej ⟩⟩ · ⟨ ⟨Ej |⟨ ⟨Ii|, (139) so that the expectation value, which corresponds to the availability of a transition with operator 

Tq ≡ π(−) 

> δq

π(+)  

> δq

(140) is 

⟨⟨Tq ⟩⟩ = X

> i,j,i ′,j ′

c(−) 

> ij

c(+)  

> i′j′

⟨⟨Ej |⟨ ⟨Ii|, π (−) 

> δq

π(+)  

> δq

|Ii′ ⟩⟩| Ej′ ⟩⟩(141) 

= X

> i,i ′

ρii ′ ⟨⟨Ii| Tq |Ii′ ⟩⟩ (142) 

= Tr (ρ T q ) (143) for density matrix ρ, which can be written as a convex combination of projections for the pure states, each with availabilities or weighting wi:

ρ = X

> i

wi |i⟩⟩⟨ ⟨i|| , where X

> i

wi = 1 , (144) 

wi = X

> j

c(−) 

> ij

c(+)  

> ij

, (145) and wi is the relative availability for a channel capacity reservation.  

> •

A pure state ψi = P 

> i

wi |i⟩⟩, where P 

> i

w2 

> i

= 1 . The location of q can be rotated from one location to the next by a phase.  

> •

A mixed state is ψi = P 

> i

wi |i⟩⟩, where P 

> i

wi = 1 the location of q is neither in one location or another. The off-diagonal elements express the entanglements of neigh-bouring agents that establish channels for transmission ∆q. For a so-called pure state, only one weight affinity wi is non-zero. The main purpose of writing agents in this way is to make contact with quantum methods, which appear at least superficially similar to that of autonomous agents. I’ll leave this identification here for others to pursue. V. C ONCLUSIONS 

What should we expect of a quantitative description of agents shaped by their promises? In scientific studies, we are usually trying to construct an accurate representations of phenomena: to understand the key players in a process, rates of change, and measurable quantities, etc. In simple studies of a single variable, elementary statistics could be sufficient to describe the phenomenon, because we can incorporate all assumptions as an introduction to the study. In fields like immunology and neuroscience, where one is trying to model the complex interactions between very different kinds of cells, i.e. with different semantics, semantics and dynamics do not separate cleanly. In this review, I’ve tried to show how one may get started in formulating problems so as to be compatible with promise theoretic principles. The precise mixture of dynamics and semantics involved in any explanation prioritizes these matters differently. Principally quantitative theories (e.g. physics) are built on a long history of generally accepted assumptions that we call semantics, and therefore they tend to be weak in encoding these fine points formally. Deeply semantic theories, 

> 28

like the biological sciences, may struggle to converge on a set of suitable idealized approximations that permit a quantitative result to be defined. Recently, knowledge acquisition, generative reasoning, and decision theory have been the main drivers of modelling, for data associated with ‘knowledge capture’, ‘machine learning’ and ‘artificial intelligence’. In all such representations, one is looking for an approximation: a threshold for choosing one decision pathway over another. No matter how one dresses up a threshold, by calculation, it must remain arbitrary and thus speculative. The principle of convergence to a stable end state is one of the few motives for selecting without such a threshold. There are two dominant ideas about reasoning in science today 18 : 

> •

Logical reasoning based on symbolic propositions that are semantically fragile and complex to establish.  

> •

Bayesian probabilities that may be robust to establish, but are computationally expensive to update and potentially ambiguous. These are not the only possibilities, yet increasingly researchers go straight for probability as a descriptive tool, and waive the details of a causal deterministic process. Probability incorpo-rates uncertainty, so it feels like an attractive lingua franca for theorists; however, relying on statistics alone potentially conflates matters of data collection with explanation. Adopting the certainty of logic, one may have to resort to dishonesty about classifications and beliefs. Adopting probabilistic forms, one risks merely replacing one form of dishonesty with another, where the use of probability itself is what stands in the way of a deeper understanding. Promise Theory and its agent dynamics offer a possible supplement to balance these, involving a composition of processes from several weakly coupled or mostly independent parts. It also relates to models of swarm intelligence and cellular automata [61]–[64]. From the perspective of Promise Theory, reasoning is about the formation of storylines, or pathways through representative nodes in a semantic spacetime, and intent is about aligning with the outcomes of those story paths. Promise Theory’s domain of quantitative application involves many forms of distributed cooperative behaviour: resilient architectures with redundant dependencies; fidelity of dis-trubuted configurations, coherent cooperation, and decentralized team performance. Semantic tasks include defining the shared purposes, knowledge graphs, authority, etc. The modelling of monetary networks is a natural promise theoretic task, indeed all forms of transport network cooperation and throughput. Modelling the value of workers in collaborative enterprises, whether human or robot. It has much to contribute to the me-chanics of complex systems in particular. It’s chief disadvantage currently lies in being unfamiliar. In probability, the question of normalization and its semantics is always a persistent headache, especially when a system 

> 18 The hybrid Tsetlin automaton model of voting bridges this divide from the bottom-up [60].

is time varying. This becomes even worse for autonomous agents, which have no controller for learning and managing the population from an external ‘Galilean’ perspective. For promise theoretic studies, the concern is that agents, which can reproduce the kinds of elementary phenomena we observe in nature, must have abundant interior resources in order to represent the processes of the natural world. There must be ‘plenty of room at the bottom’ [65] in order to realize phenomena as autonomous agents—all of which begs the question: how does nature really do it? REFERENCES [1] J.A. Bergstra and M. Burgess. Promise Theory: Principles and Applications (second edition) . χtAxis Press, 2014,2019. [2] Mark Burgess. An approach to understanding policy based on autonomy and voluntary cooperation. In IFIP/IEEE 16th international workshop on distributed systems operations and management (DSOM), in LNCS 3775 , pages 97–108, 2005. [3] M. Wooldridge. An Introduction to MultiAgent Systems . Wiley, Chichester, 2002. [4] K. Popper. Observation and Interpretation , chapter The Propensity Interpretation of the Calculus of Probability, and The Quantum Theory. Butterworths, London, 1957. [5] B.G. Englert, editor. Julian Schwinger, Quantum Mechanics: Symbolism of Atomic Measurement . Springer, 2001. [6] C.E. Shannon and W. Weaver. The Mathematical Theory of Communica-tion . University of Illinois Press, Urbana, 1949. [7] T.M. Cover and J.A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory . (J.Wiley & Sons., New York), 1991. [8] H. Lewis and C. Papadimitriou. Elements of the Theory of Computation, Second edition . Prentice Hall, New York, 1997. [9] M. Burgess. Spacetimes with semantics (i). arXiv:1411.5563 , 2014. [10] M. Burgess. Spacetimes with semantics (ii). arXiv.org:1505.01716 , 2015. [11] M. Burgess. Spacetimes with semantics (iii). arXiv:1608.02193 , 2016. [12] M. Burgess. Motion of the third kind (i) notes on the causal structure of virtual processes for privileged observers. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.30483.35361 (notes available on Researchgate), 2021. [13] M. Burgess. Motion of the third kind (ii) notes on kinematics, dynamics, and relativity. (notes available on Researchgate), 2022. [14] M. Burgess. Motion of the third kind (iii): On the semantics of motion in discrete spacetimes and evolutionary selection. (notes available on Researchgate), 2024. [15] M. Burgess. Two dimensional time-series for anomaly detection and regulation in adaptive systems. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, IFIP/IEEE 13th International Workshop on Distributed Systems: Opera-tions and Management (DSOM 2002) , 2506:169, 2002. [16] M. Burgess. Probabilistic anomaly detection in distributed computer networks. Science of Computer Programming , 60(1):1–26, 2006. [17] J. Bjelland, M. Burgess, G. Canright, and K. Engø-Monsen. Eigenvectors of directed graphs and importance scores: dominance, t-rank, and sink remedies. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 20(1):98–151, 2010. [18] S. Galam. Sociophysics . Springer, 2012. [19] L.E. Ballentine. Quantum Mechanics: A Modern Development . World Scientific, 1998. [20] J. Pearl. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference . Morgen Kaufmann, San Francisco, 1988. [21] G.R. Grimmett and D.R. Stirzaker. Probability and random processes (3rd edition) . Oxford scientific publications, Oxford, 2001. [22] Mark Burgess. Testing the quantitative spacetime hypothesis using artificial narrative comprehension (i) : Bootstrapping meaning from episodic narrative viewed as a feature landscape, 2020. [23] D.O. Hebb. The Organization of Behavior . Wiley & Sons, 1949. [24] K.B. Korb and A.E. Nicholson. Bayesian Artificial Intelligence . Chapman and Hall, 2004. [25] J. McInerney, R. Ranganath, and D.M. Blei. The population posterior and bayesian inference on streams, 2015. [26] F. Reif. Fundamentals of statistical mechanics . McGraw-Hill, 1965. [27] N. Wiener. Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine . MIT Press, 1948. 

29 [28] Mark Burgess and Andr ´as Gerlits. Continuous integration of data histories into consistent namespaces. 2022. [29] R.O. Duda, P.E. Hart, and D.G. Stork. Pattern classification . Wiley Interscience, New York, 2001. [30] M. Burgess. Describe the scene! the investment in context. Medium, April 2026. [31] A. Rapoport. N-Person Game Theory: Concepts and Applications . Dover, New York, 1970. [32] R.B. Myerson. Game theory: Analysis of Conflict . (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA), 1991. [33] J. Strassner. Handbook of Network and System Administration , chapter Knowledge Engineering Using Ontologies. Elsevier Handbook, 2007. [34] N. Fanizzi, C. d’Amato, and F. Esposito. Machine learning methods for ontology mining. Semantic Computing , pages 131–153, 07 2010. [35] J.L.G. Dietz. Enterprise ontology . Springer, 2006. [36] C.M. Bishop and H. Bishop. Deep Learning . Springer, 2023. [37] M. Burgess. A Treatise on Systems: Volume 1: Analytical description of human-information networks . in progress, 2004-. [38] M. Burgess and S. Fagernes. Norms and swarms. Lecture Notes on Computer Science , 4543 (Proceedings of the first International Conference on Autonomous Infrastructure and Security (AIMS)):107–118, 2007. [39] R.P.N. Rao and D.H. Ballard. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. 

Nature Neuroscience , 2(1):79–87, 1999. [40] B. Millidge, A.K. Seth, and C.L. Buckley. Predictive coding: a theoretical and experimental review. CoRR , abs/2107.12979, 2021. [41] K. Friston. A theory of cortical responses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 360(1456):815–836, 04 2005. [42] K. Friston. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 11:127–138, 2010. [43] K. Friston. The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain? Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 13:293–301, 2009. [44] T. Parr, G. Pezzulo, and K.J. Friston. Active Inference: the Free Energy Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior . MIT Press, 2022. [45] R. Bogacz. A tutorial on the free-energy framework for modelling perception and learning. Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 76:198– 211, 2017. Model-based Cognitive Neuroscience. [46] R.P. Feynman. Statistical Mechanics . Addison Wesley, 1972. [47] M. Burgess. Configurable immunity model of evolving configuration management. Science of Computer Programming , 51:197, 2004. [48] R. Cao. New labels for old ideas: Predictive processing and the interpretation of neural signals. Biology & Philosophy , 35(5):52, 2020. [49] Beren Millidge. Applications of the free energy principle to machine learning and neuroscience (thesis), 2021. [50] M.W. Zemansky and R.H. Dittman. Heat and Thermodynamics . McGraw-Hill, 1981. [51] M. Burgess. Agent semantics, semantic spacetime, and graphical reasoning, arxiv cs.ai 2506.07756, 2025. [52] M. Burgess. Notes on trust as a causal basis for social science. 

SSRN Archive, available at http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4252501 (DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.4252501) , August 2022. [53] M. Burgess and R.I.M. Dunbar. A promise theory perspective on the role of intent in group dynamics. arXiv:2402.00598 [cs.SI] , 2023. [54] R. Dunbar. Grooming, Gossip and the Evolution of Language . Faber and Faber, London, 1996. [55] W.X. Zhou, S. Sornette, R.A. Hill, and R.I.M. Dunbar. Discrete hierarchical organization of social group sizes. Proc. Royal Soc. , 272:439– 444, 2004. [56] M. Burgess and R.I.M. Dunbar. Group related phenomena in wikipedia edits. arXiv:2402.00595 [cs.SI] , 2023. [57] M. Burgess. γ(3 , 4) ‘attention’ in cognitive agents: Ontology-free knowledge representations with promise theoretic semantics, 2026. [58] Peter Morgan. The collapse of a quantum state as a joint probability construction. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical ,55(25):254006, June 2022. [59] C. Wetterich. Quantum formalism for classical statistics. Annals of Physics , 393:1–70, 2018. [60] O.C. Granmo. The tsetlin machine - a game theoretic bandit driven approach to optimal pattern recognition with propositional logic. ArXiv ,abs/1804.01508, 2018. [61] E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo, and G. Theraulaz. Swarm Intelligence: From Natural to Artificial Systems . Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1999. [62] J. Kennedy and R.C. Eberhart. Swarm Intelligence . Morgan Kaufmann (Academic Press), 2001. [63] L. Arlotti, A. Deutsch, and M. Lachowicz. On a discrete boltzmann type model of swarming. Math. Comp. Model , 41:1193–1201, 2005. [64] Kazadi S. Swarm Engineering . PhD thesis, California Institute of Technology, 2000. [65] R.P. Feynman. There’s plenty of room at the bottom. Engineering and Science , 23(5):22–36, 1960. 

30